Title 1: General Provisions Chapter 1: Rules of Construction § 1-101 Short title. This code shall be known and may be cited as administrative code of the city of New York. § 1-102 Legislative intent. It is the intent of the legislature by the enactment of this chapter to recodify, without substantive change, the administrative code of the city of New York in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter. The enactment of this code shall not be construed as validating, ratifying or conforming any provision hereof which was enacted by any local law of the city of New York, and incorporated within the prior administrative code of the city of New York and recodified in this code which the city was without authority to enact at the time of such enactment of such local law. § 1-103 Effect of local law. This chapter shall not operate to deprive the local legislative body of the city of New York of the power to enact local laws in relation to any matter in respect to which such power would otherwise exist, nor shall it limit such power. If this power otherwise exists, any provision of this chapter may be superseded, supplemented or amended by local law in the same manner and to the same extent as such provisions could be superseded, supplemented or amended had this chapter not been enacted. § 1-104 Judicial notice. a. All courts shall take judicial notice of all laws contained in the code, the charter, local laws, ordinances, the health code, resolutions, and of all rules and regulations adopted pursuant to law. b. The compilations of rules and regulations published pursuant to subdivision f of section eleven hundred five of the charter shall be prima facie evidence in all courts of the authenticity of the provisions contained therein. § 1-105 Separability. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of the code shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. § 1-106 No failure of applicable statutes. Any provision of any statute applicable to the city or any part thereof, now or hereafter enacted, imposing functions generally, specifically or by devolution, upon any agency, which is not identified in the city by the designation provided in such statute, shall be deemed to have imposed such functions upon any agency of the city or part thereof, to which has been transferred the functions of the designated agency or which exercises similar functions, or in the absence of such agency, upon the mayor. § 1-107 Pending actions and proceedings. No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time the code shall take effect, brought by or against the city or any agency or officer thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of the code or by anything therein contained. All such actions and proceedings may be continued in full force and effect under the appropriate provisions of the code. § 1-108 Existing rights and remedies saved. No existing right or remedy of any kind shall be lost or impaired by reason of this recodification. § 1-109 Enumeration of powers not restrictive. The enumeration of specific powers by this code shall not operate to restrict the meaning of a general grant of power contained in this code or to exclude other powers comprehended in such general grant. § 1-110 No repeal by implication. a. It is not intended by this code to repeal by implication any existing provision of law and no law shall be deemed repealed thereby unless expressly provided for herein. b. No law hereafter enacted shall be construed to repeal any provision of this code by implication, but every such provision shall be deemed to be in full force and effect until specifically repealed or amended. § 1-111 Amendment of water supply provisions. All rights and powers to amend, modify, extend or supersede any provision or provisions of sections 5-376 through 5-399, 5-401 through 5-403, 5-410, 5-418, 5-423, 5-424, 5-426, 5-429, 24-301, 24-347 through 24-352, and 24-354 through 24-365 of this code and any other provision or provisions of this code relating to any lands now or hereafter acquired outside the corporate limits of the city for water supply purposes, including highways, bridges and sewers, are hereby reserved to the legislature of the state of New York. § 1-112 Definitions. Unless expressly otherwise provided, whenever used in the code, the following terms shall mean or include: 1. Agency. A city, county, borough, or other office, department, division, bureau, board or commission, or a corporation, institution or agency of government, the expenses of which are paid in whole or in part from the city treasury. 2. Budget. The expense budget unless the context otherwise requires. 3. Charter. The New York city charter. 4. City. The city of New York. 5. County. Any county wholly included within the city of New York. 6. Employee. Any person whose salary in whole or in part is paid out of the city treasury. 7. Intercepting sewer. A sewer the principal purpose of which is the interception from other sewers and conveyance of sewage to treatment plants. In case of doubt the board of estimate shall decide whether a sewer is an intercepting sewer. 8. Law. Any provision of the constitution, enactments of the state legislature, the charter, the administrative code, any local law, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to any of the aforementioned. 9. Maintenance. Includes minor repairs, and in case of doubt the mayor or an officer designated by him shall decide whether a repair is a minor repair. 10. Person. A natural person, co-partnership, firm, company, association, joint stock association, corporation or other like organization. 11. Real property. Includes real estate, lands, tenements and hereditaments, corporeal or incorporeal. 12. Statute. Any enactment of the legislature of the state of New York. 13. Street. Any public street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard, concourse, parkway, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, boardwalk, viaduct, square or place, except marginal streets. 14. The code. The administrative code of the city. 15. The port of New York. Includes all the waters of the North River, the East River and the Harlem River and all the tidal waters embraced within or adjacent to or opposite to the shores of the city. 16. Three-fourths vote and two-thirds vote. When they apply to the board of estimate, shall mean, respectively, three-fourths and two-thirds of the total number of votes which all the members of the board are entitled to cast. 17. Wharf property. Wharves, piers, docks and bulkheads and structures thereon and slips and basins, the land beneath any of the foregoing, and all rights, privileges and easements appurtenant thereto and land under water in the port of New York, and such upland or made land adjacent thereto as was vested in the department of docks on January first, nineteen hundred thirty- eight or thereafter was or may be assigned to it or its successor agencies. 18. Water front property. Property fronting on all the tidal waters in the port and city of New York and extending inshore to the property line of the first adverse owner and shall include such land under water extending outshore to the pierhead line or the property line, whichever extends furthest outshore. 19. Water front commerce. The activity on water front property which encompasses the receipt of cargo or goods at the wharves, piers, docks or bulkheads from ships and their delivery to points inland or the receipt of such cargo or goods at such wharves, piers, docks or bulkheads from points inland for shipment by ships and shall include the temporary storage of such cargo or goods in the sheds or warehouses on such property pending their delivery or shipment. 20. Furtherance of navigation. The activity on water front property which involves ship building, ship repairing, boating, dry dock facilities and similar uses. 21. The term domestic partner shall mean persons who have a registered domestic partnership pursuant to section 3-240 of the administrative code, a domestic partnership registered in accordance with executive order number 123, dated August 7, 1989, or a domestic partnership registered in accordance with executive order number 48, dated January 7, 1993. 22. Notice of violation. An instrument charging a person or entity with violation of a local law or rule. Notice of violation shall be deemed to include a civil summons, a summons for a civil violation and a notice of hearing. 23. “Menstrual products.” Menstrual cups, tampons, and menstrual pads for use in connection with the menstrual cycle. a. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all laws, documents and materials generated by the city shall be drafted in a gender-neutral manner and shall not include gender-biased terminology; including, but not limited to, the term councilman and councilmanic. To the extent consistent with the meaning of this law, masculine pronouns may be used together with feminine pronouns in reference to elected officials, commissioners and similar persons. b. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision a of this section, no law, document, or other material of the city shall be invalidated due to the inclusion of gender-biased terminology. c. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision a of this section, no agency of the city shall be required to dispose of any materials that were produced prior to the enactment of this section and which may include gender- biased terminology. d. The provisions of subdivision a of this section shall in no way interfere with the ability of any agency of the city to collect gender-specific information, to the extent permitted by law, as necessary to carry out their responsibilities; including, but not limited to, maintaining personnel files, generating medical records, or creating police records. e. The provisions of subdivision a of this section shall not apply to any law, document, or material that addresses a gender-specific matter; including, but not limited to, pregnancy or maternal health. f. All laws, documents, and materials generated by the city shall be drafted using the term “menstrual products” when referring to products for use in connection with the menstrual cycle such as menstrual cups, tampons, and menstrual pads. § 1-114 Language referring to noncitizens. a. Any law, rule, order or other document, or material created by the city shall not use the terms alien, illegal immigrant, or illegal migrant to refer to an individual who is not a citizen of the United States, provided that: 1. A law, rule, order, or any other document or material shall not be deemed invalid due to the inclusion of such a term. 2. An agency shall not be required to dispose of any printed material that includes such a term if such material was produced prior to the effective date of the local law that added this section, and may use such material until it is exhausted. 3. An agency of the city may use such a term in a law, rule, order, or other document or material if the agency determines that using such a term is required pursuant to a state or federal law, or that excluding such term would be inconsistent with state or federal law, or that using such a term is reasonably necessary to achieve the agency's purpose. b. No later than one year after the effective date of this section, each agency shall review its rules and other documents or materials to identify any use of the terms prohibited by subdivision a of this section, and amend any such rule that is in effect on the effective date of this section, or revise any such other document or material, in accordance with this section, provided that the failure to amend any such rule, document or material shall not change the validity thereof, and further provided that this paragraph shall not apply to orders issued before the effective date of this section. 

Title 8: Civil Rights Chapter 1: Commission on Human Rights § 8-101 Policy. In the city of New York, with its great cosmopolitan population, there is no greater danger to the health, morals, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants than the existence of groups prejudiced against one another and antagonistic to each other because of their actual or perceived differences, including those based on race, color, creed, age, national origin, immigration or citizenship status, gender, sexual orientation, disability, marital status, partnership status, caregiver status, sexual and reproductive health decisions, uniformed service, height, weight, any lawful source of income, status as a victim of domestic violence or as a victim of sex offenses or stalking, whether children are, may be or would be residing with a person or conviction or arrest record. The council hereby finds and declares that prejudice, intolerance, bigotry, and discrimination, bias-related violence or harassment and disorder occasioned thereby threaten the rights and proper privileges of its inhabitants and menace the institutions and foundation of a free democratic state. The council further finds and declares that gender-based harassment threatens the terms, conditions and privileges of employment. A city agency is hereby created with power to eliminate and prevent discrimination from playing any role in actions relating to employment, public accommodations, and housing and other real estate, and to take other actions against prejudice, intolerance, bigotry, discrimination, sexual harassment and bias-related violence or harassment as herein provided; and the commission established hereunder is hereby given general jurisdiction and power for such purposes. § 8-102 Definitions. Except as otherwise expressly provided, when used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Acts or threats of violence. The term acts or threats of violence includes, but is not limited to, acts, which would constitute violations of the penal law. Caregiver. The term caregiver means a person who provides direct and ongoing care for a minor child or a care recipient. As used in this definition: 1. Care recipient. The term care recipient means a person with a disability who: (i) is a covered relative, or a person who resides in the caregiver's household and (ii) relies on the caregiver for medical care or to meet the needs of daily living. 2. Covered relative. The term covered relative means a caregiver's child, spouse, domestic partner, parent, sibling, grandchild or grandparent, or the child or parent of the caregiver's spouse or domestic partner, or any other individual in a familial relationship with the caregiver as designated by the rules of the commission. 3. Grandchild. The term grandchild means a child of a caregiver's child. 4. Grandparent. The term grandparent means a parent of a caregiver's parent. 5. Parent. The term parent means a biological, foster, step- or adoptive parent, or a legal guardian of a caregiver, or a person who stood in loco parentis when the caregiver was a minor child. 6. Sibling. The term sibling means a caregiver's brother or sister, including half-siblings, step-siblings and siblings related through adoption. 7. Spouse. The term spouse means a person to whom a caregiver is legally married under the laws of the state of New York. 8. Child. The term child means a biological, adopted or foster child, a legal ward or a child of a caregiver standing in loco parentis. 9. Minor child. The term minor child means a child under the age of 18. Commercial space. The term commercial space means any space in a building, structure or portion thereof which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied for the manufacture, sale, resale, processing, reprocessing, displaying, storing, handling, garaging or distribution of personal property; and any space which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as a business or professional unit or office in any building, structure or portion thereof. Commission. The term commission, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the text, means the city commission on human rights. Conditional offer of employment. The term conditional offer of employment means an offer of employment, promotion or transfer which may only be revoked based on one of the following: 1. The results of a criminal background check, conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 2. The results of a medical exam as permitted by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 12112; or 3. Other information the employer could not have reasonably known before making the conditional offer if the employer can show as an affirmative defense that, based on the information, it would not have made the offer regardless of the results of the criminal background check. 1. Consumer credit history. The term consumer credit history means an individual's credit worthiness, credit standing, credit capacity, or payment history, as indicated by: (i) a consumer credit report; (ii) credit score; or (iii) information an employer obtains directly from the individual regarding (1) details about credit accounts, including the individual's number of credit accounts, late or missed payments, charged-off debts, items in collections, credit limit, prior credit report inquiries, or (2) bankruptcies, judgments or liens. A consumer credit report shall include any written or other communication of any information by a consumer reporting agency that bears on a consumer's creditworthiness, credit standing, credit capacity or credit history. 2. Cooperative dialogue. The term cooperative dialogue means the process by which a covered entity and a person entitled to an accommodation, or who may be entitled to an accommodation under the law, engage in good faith in a written or oral dialogue concerning the person's accommodation needs; potential accommodations that may address the person's accommodation needs, including alternatives to a requested accommodation; and the difficulties that such potential accommodations may pose for the covered entity. 3. Covered entity. The term covered entity means a person required to comply with any provision of section 8-107. Disability. The term disability means any physical, medical, mental or psychological impairment, or a history or record of such impairment. As used in this definition: 1. Physical, medical, mental, or psychological impairment. The term physical, medical, mental, or psychological impairment means: (a) An impairment of any system of the body; including, but not limited to, the neurological system; the musculoskeletal system; the special sense organs and respiratory organs, including, but not limited to, speech organs; the cardiovascular system; the reproductive system; the digestive and genito-urinary systems; the hemic and lymphatic systems; the immunological systems; the skin; and the endocrine system; or (b) A mental or psychological impairment; 2. In the case of alcoholism, drug addiction or other substance abuse, the term disability only applies to a person who (i) is recovering or has recovered and (ii) currently is free of such abuse, and does not include an individual who is currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs, when the covered entity acts on the basis of such use. Domestic partner. The term domestic partner means any person who has a registered domestic partnership pursuant to section 3-240, a domestic partnership registered in accordance with executive order number 123, dated August 7, 1989, or a domestic partnership registered in accordance with executive order number 48, dated January 7, 1993. 4. Educational institution. The term educational institution includes kindergartens, primary and secondary schools, academies, colleges, universities, professional schools, extension courses, and all other educational facilities. 5. Employer. For purposes of subdivisions 1, 2, 3, 10, 11-a, 22, 23, 32, subparagraph 1 of paragraph a of subdivision 21, and paragraph e of subdivision 21 of section 8-107, the term employer does not include any employer that has fewer than four persons in the employ of such employer at all times during the period beginning twelve months before the start of an unlawful discriminatory practice and continuing through the end of such unlawful discriminatory practice, provided however, that in an action for unlawful discriminatory practice based on a claim of gender-based harassment pursuant to subdivision one of section 8-107, the term employer shall include any employer, including those with fewer than four persons in their employ. For purposes of this definition, (i) natural persons working as independent contractors in furtherance of an employer's business enterprise shall be counted as persons in the employ of such employer and (ii) the employer's parent, spouse, domestic partner or child if employed by the employer are included as in the employ of such employer. 6. Employment agency. The term employment agency includes any person undertaking to procure employees or opportunities to work. 7. Family. The term family, as used in subparagraph (4) of paragraph a of subdivision 5 of section 8-107, means either a person occupying a dwelling and maintaining a household, with not more than four boarders, roomers or lodgers, or two or more persons occupying a dwelling, living together and maintaining a common household, with not more than four boarders, roomers or lodgers. As used in this definition, a boarder, roomer or lodger residing with a family means a person living within the household who pays a consideration for such residence and does not occupy such space within the household as an incident of employment therein. 8. Gender. The term gender includes actual or perceived sex, gender identity and gender expression, including a person's actual or perceived gender-related self-image, appearance, behavior, expression or other gender-related characteristic, regardless of the sex assigned to that person at birth. 9. Housing accommodation. The term housing accommodation includes any building, structure or portion thereof that is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as the home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings. Except as otherwise specifically provided, such term includes a publicly-assisted housing accommodation. 10. Immigration or citizenship status. The term immigration or citizenship status means: 1. The citizenship of any person, or 2. The immigration status of any person who is not a citizen or national of the United States. 11. Intelligence information. The term intelligence information means records and data compiled for the purpose of criminal investigation or counterterrorism, including records and data relating to the order or security of a correctional facility, reports of informants, investigators or other persons, or from any type of surveillance associated with an identifiable individual, or investigation or analysis of potential terrorist threats. 12. Intern; 1. The term intern means an individual who performs work for an employer on a temporary basis whose work: (a) Provides training or supplements training given in an educational environment such that the employability of the individual performing the work may be enhanced; (b) Provides experience for the benefit of the individual performing the work; and (c) Is performed under the close supervision of existing staff; 2. The term includes such individuals without regard to whether the employer pays them a salary or wage. 13. Labor organization. The term labor organization includes any organization that exists and is constituted for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms and conditions of employment, or of other mutual aid or protection in connection with employment. 14. Lactation room. The term lactation room means a sanitary place, other than a restroom, that can be used to express breast milk shielded from view and free from intrusion and that includes at minimum an electrical outlet, a chair, a surface on which to place a breast pump and other personal items, and nearby access to running water. 15. Lawful source of income. The term lawful source of income includes, but is not limited to, child support, alimony, foster care subsidies, income derived from social security, or any form of federal, state, or local public assistance or housing assistance including, but not limited to, section 8 vouchers, whether or not such income or credit is paid or attributed directly to a landlord. 17. Marijuana. The term marijuana has the same meaning as the term marihuana as such term is defined in subdivision 21 of section 3302 of the public health law. 18. National origin. The term national origin includes ancestry. 19. National security information. The term national security information means any knowledge relating to the national defense or foreign relations of the United States, regardless of its physical form or characteristics, that is owned by, is produced by or for, or is under the control of the United States government and is defined as such by the United States government and its agencies and departments. 20. Occupation. The term occupation means any lawful vocation, trade, profession or field of specialization. 21. Partnership status. The term partnership status means the status of being in a domestic partnership, as defined by subdivision a of section 3-240. 22. Person. The term person includes one or more natural persons, proprietorships, partnerships, associations, group associations, organizations, governmental bodies or agencies, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, or receivers. 22. Person aggrieved; 1. The term person aggrieved, except as used in section 8-123, includes a person whose right created, granted or protected by this chapter is violated by a covered entity directly or through conduct of the covered entity to which the person's agent or employee is subjected while the agent or employee was acting, or as a result of the agent or employee having acted, within the scope of the agency or employment relationship. For purposes of this definition, an agent or employee's protected status is imputed to that person's principal or employer when the agent or employee acts within the scope of the agency or employment relationship. It is irrelevant whether or not the covered entity knows of the agency or employment relationship; 2. A person is aggrieved even if that person's only injury is the deprivation of a right granted or protected by this chapter; 3. This definition does not limit or exclude any other basis for a cause of action. Place or provider of public accommodation. The term place or provider of public accommodation includes providers, whether licensed or unlicensed, of goods, services, facilities, accommodations, advantages or privileges of any kind, and places, whether licensed or unlicensed, where goods, services, facilities, accommodations, advantages or privileges of any kind are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available. Such term does not include any club which proves that it is in its nature distinctly private. A club is not in its nature distinctly private if it has more than 400 members, provides regular meal service and regularly receives payment for dues, fees, use of space, facilities, services, meals or beverages directly or indirectly from or on behalf of non-members for the furtherance of trade or business. For the purposes of this definition, a corporation incorporated under the benevolent orders law or described in the benevolent orders law but formed under any other law of this state, or a religious corporation incorporated under the education law or the religious corporation law is deemed to be in its nature distinctly private. No club that sponsors or conducts any amateur athletic contest or sparring exhibition and advertises or bills such contest or exhibition as a New York state championship contest or uses the words New York state in its announcements is a private exhibition within the meaning of this definition. 23. Public agency. The term public agency means the state or any local subdivision thereof, or any state or local department, agency, board or commission. 24. Publicly-assisted housing accommodations. The term publicly-assisted housing accommodations includes: 1. Publicly-owned or operated housing accommodations; 2. Housing accommodations operated by housing companies under the supervision of the state commissioner of housing and community renewal, or the department of housing preservation and development; 3. Housing accommodations constructed after July 1, 1950, and housing accommodations sold after July 1, 1991: (a) That are exempt in whole or in part from taxes levied by the state or any of its political subdivisions; (b) That are constructed on land sold below cost by the state or any of its political subdivisions or any agency thereof, pursuant to the federal housing act of 1949; (c) That are constructed in whole or in part on property acquired or assembled by the state or any of its political subdivisions or any agency thereof through the power of condemnation or otherwise for the purpose of such construction; or (d) For the acquisition, construction, repair or maintenance for which the state or any of its political subdivisions or any agency thereof supplies funds or other financial assistance; and 4. Housing accommodations, the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of which is, after July 1, 1955, financed in whole or in part by a loan, whether or not secured by a mortgage, the repayment of which is guaranteed or insured by the federal government or any agency thereof, or the state or any of its political subdivisions or any agency thereof. 1. Real estate broker. The term real estate broker means any person who, for another and for a fee, commission or other valuable consideration, lists for sale, sells, at auction or otherwise, exchanges, buys or rents, or offers or attempts to negotiate a sale at auction, or otherwise, exchange, purchase or rental of an estate or interest in real estate or collects or offers or attempts to collect rent for the use of real estate, or negotiates, or offers or attempts to negotiate, a loan secured or to be secured by a mortgage or other incumbrance upon or transfer of real estate. In the sale of lots pursuant to the provisions of article nine-a of the real property law, the term real estate broker shall also include any person employed by or on behalf of the owner or owners of lots or other parcels of real estate, at a stated salary, or upon commission, or upon a salary and commission, or otherwise, to sell such real estate, or any parts thereof, in lots or other parcels, and who shall sell or exchange, or offer or attempt or agree to negotiate the sale or exchange of any such lot or parcel of real estate. 2. Real estate salesperson. The term real estate salesperson means a person employed by or authorized by a licensed real estate broker to list for sale, sell or offer for sale at auction or otherwise to buy or offer to buy or to negotiate the purchase or sale or exchange of real estate or to negotiate a loan on real estate or to lease or rent or offer to lease, rent or place for rent any real estate, or who collects or offers or attempts to collect rents for the use of real estate for or on behalf of such real estate broker. 3. Reasonable accommodation; 1. The term reasonable accommodation means such accommodation that can be made that does not cause undue hardship in the conduct of the covered entity's business. The covered entity has the burden of proving undue hardship. In making a determination of undue hardship with respect to claims filed under subdivisions 1, 2, 22 or 27 of section 8-107, the factors which may be considered include but are not limited to: (a) The nature and cost of the accommodation; (b) The overall financial resources of the facility or the facilities involved in the provision of the reasonable accommodation; the number of persons employed at such facility; the effect on expenses and resources, or the impact otherwise of such accommodation upon the operation of the facility; (c) The overall financial resources of the covered entity; the overall size of the business of a covered entity with respect to the number of its employees, the number, type, and location of its facilities; and (d) The type of operation or operations of the covered entity, including the composition, structure and functions of the workforce of such entity; the geographic separateness, administrative or fiscal relationship of the facility or facilities in question to the covered entity; 2. In making a determination of undue hardship with respect to claims for reasonable accommodation to an employee's or prospective employee's religious observance filed under subdivision 3 of section 8-107, the definition of undue hardship set forth in paragraph b of such subdivision applies. 4. Relevant fair chance factors. The term relevant fair chance factors means: 1. With respect to arrests or convictions preceding employment, other than arrests or criminal accusations pending at the time of application for employment, the factors set forth in section 753 of the correction law; 2. With respect to arrests or criminal accusations pending at the time of an application for employment and arrests or convictions that have occurred during employment: (a) the policy of the city, as expressed in this chapter, to overcome stigma toward and unnecessary exclusion of persons with criminal justice involvement in the areas of licensure and employment; (b) the specific duties and responsibilities necessarily related to the employment held by the person; (c) the bearing, if any, of the criminal offense or offenses for which the applicant or employee was convicted, or that are alleged in the case of pending arrests or criminal accusations, on the applicant or employee's fitness or ability to perform one or more such duties or responsibilities; (d) whether the person was 25 years of age or younger at the time of occurrence of the criminal offense or offenses for which the person was convicted, or that are alleged in the case of pending arrests or criminal accusations; (e) the seriousness of such offense or offenses; and (f) the legitimate interest of the public agency or private employer in protecting property, and the safety and welfare of specific individuals or the general public; and (g) any additional information produced by the applicant or employee, or produced on their behalf, in regards to their rehabilitation or good conduct, including history of positive performance and conduct on the job or in the community, or any other evidence of good conduct. 1. Sexual and reproductive health decisions. The term sexual and reproductive health decisions means any decision by an individual to receive services, which are arranged for or offered or provided to individuals relating to sexual and reproductive health, including the reproductive system and its functions. Such services include, but are not limited to, fertility-related medical procedures, sexually transmitted disease prevention, testing, and treatment, and family planning services and counseling, such as birth control drugs and supplies, emergency contraception, sterilization procedures, pregnancy testing, and abortion. 2. Sexual orientation. The term sexual orientation means an individual's actual or perceived romantic, physical or sexual attraction to other persons, or lack thereof, on the basis of gender. A continuum of sexual orientation exists and includes, but is not limited to, heterosexuality, homosexuality, bisexuality, asexuality and pansexuality. 3. Tetrahydrocannabinols. The term tetrahydrocannabinols has the same meaning as such term is defined in paragraph 21 of subdivision d of section 3306 of the public health law. 4. Trade secrets. The term trade secrets means information that (i) derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable by proper means by other persons who can obtain economic value from its disclosure or use; (ii) is the subject of efforts that are reasonable under the circumstances to maintain its secrecy; and (iii) can reasonably be said to be the end product of significant innovation. The term trade secrets does not include general proprietary company information such as handbooks and policies. The term regular access to trade secrets does not include access to or the use of client, customer or mailing lists. 5. Unemployed or unemployment. The term unemployed or unemployment means not having a job, being available for work, and seeking employment. Uniformed service. 6. The term uniformed service means: 1. Current or prior service in: (a) The United States army, navy, air force, marine corps, coast guard, commissioned corps of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration, commissioned corps of the United States public health services, army national guard or air national guard; (b) The organized militia of the state of New York, as described in section 2 of the military law, or the organized militia of any other state, territory or possession of the United States; or (c) Any other service designated as part of the uniformed services pursuant to subsection (16) of section 4303 of title 38 of the United States code; 2. Membership in any reserve component of the United States army, navy, air force, marine corps, or coast guard; or 3. Being listed on the state reserve list or the state retired list as described in section 2 of the military law or comparable status for any other state, territory or possession of the United States. 7. Unlawful discriminatory practice. The term unlawful discriminatory practice includes only those practices specified in section 8-107. Victim of domestic violence. The term victim of domestic violence means: 1. A person who has been subjected to acts or threats of violence, not including acts of self-defense, committed by a current or former spouse or domestic partner of the victim, by a person with whom the victim shares a child in common, by a person who is cohabiting with or has cohabited with the victim, by a person who is or has been in a continuing social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with the victim, or by a person who is living or has continually or at regular intervals lived in the same household as the victim; or 2. A person who has been subjected to acts or threats of economic abuse, committed by a current or former spouse or domestic partner of the victim, by a person with whom the victim shares a child in common, by a person who is cohabiting with or has cohabited with the victim, by a person who is or has been in a continuing social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with the victim, or by a person who is living or has continually or at regular intervals lived in the same household as the victim. 8. Economic Abuse. As used in this definition, the term “economic abuse” means acts or omissions that control, obstruct, or interfere with a person’s ability to use or maintain economic resources to which they are entitled or to acquire economic resources, including by coercion, deception, fraud, or manipulation. 9. Victim of sex offenses or stalking. The term victim of sex offenses or stalking means a victim of acts that would constitute violations of article 130 of the penal law or a victim of acts that would constitute violations of sections 120.45, 120.50, 120.55, or 120.60 of the penal law. § 8-102a Additional definitions. For purposes of paragraph (o) of subdivision 5 of section 8-107, the following terms have the following meanings: Criminal background check. The term “criminal background check” means the following actions: 1. Asking an individual, orally or in writing, if they have a criminal history; 2. Searching publicly available records, including through a third party, such as a consumer reporting agency, private database, or website, for information about an individual’s criminal history; or 3. Otherwise gathering records or information relating to an individual’s criminal history. Criminal history. The term “criminal history” means an individual’s conviction history, non-convictions and excludable matters, and pending cases. Excludable matters. The term “excludable matters” means: 1. A criminal action that was resolved in favor of an individual, including actions concluded in one of the following ways: (a) Termination in favor of the individual; (b) Adjudication as a youthful offender or for juvenile delinquency; (c) Conviction of a violation; or (d) Conviction that has been sealed; 2. Criminal charges pending for which a court has issued an adjournment in contemplation of dismissal pursuant to sections 170.55, 170.56, 210.46, 210.47, or 215.10 of the New York criminal procedure law, or pursuant to a comparable law of another jurisdiction that is in effect; and 3. A disposition of a criminal matter under federal law or the laws of another jurisdiction that results in a status comparable to what results from an “excludable matter” under New York law. Pending case. The term “pending case” means a criminal accusation or an arrest based on a criminal accusation that has not yet been adjudicated to a verdict or dismissed at the time the criminal background check or analysis is conducted by a covered entity. An action that has been adjourned in contemplation of dismissal shall not be considered a pending case unless, prior to the time the criminal background check or analysis is conducted by a covered entity the order to adjourn in contemplation of dismissal is revoked and the case is restored to the calendar for further prosecution. Reviewable criminal history. 1. The term “reviewable criminal history” means: (a) Any conviction registered on the New York sex offense registry maintained by the state division of criminal justice services pursuant to section 168b of the New York corrections law, on the federal sex offense registry created pursuant to section 20902 of title 34 of the United States code, or on a register in any other jurisdiction for which an individual is required to register as a sex offender; (b) Any other misdemeanor conviction under the laws of New York or another jurisdiction where less than three years have passed from (a) the date of release from incarceration, or (b) the date of sentencing for an individual who was not sentenced to a period of incarceration; (c) Any other felony conviction under the laws of New York or another jurisdiction where less than five years have passed from (a) the date of release from incarceration, or (b) the date of sentencing for an individual who was not sentenced to a period of incarceration. 2. However, the term “reviewable criminal history” shall not include: (a) Convictions that have been sealed, expunged, the subject of an executive pardon, the subject of a certificate of relief from disabilities, or otherwise legally nullified or vacated; (b) Convictions in another jurisdiction for (i) having sought, obtained, provided, or facilitated reproductive or gender-affirming care, as defined in section 10-184.1 of the administrative code, outside the state of New York under circumstances where the conduct would have been lawful had it occurred in the state of New York; (ii) having engaged in “legally protected health activity” as defined in section 570.17 of the New York criminal procedure law; or (iii) conviction for the possession of cannabis that would not constitute a felony in the state of New York; or (c) Excludable matters. § 8-103 Repealed Commission on human rights. § 8-104 Repealed Functions. § 8-105 Repealed Powers and duties. § 8-106 Repealed Relations with city departments and agencies. § 8-107 Unlawful discriminatory practices. 1. Employment. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice: (a) For an employer or an employee or agent thereof, because of the actual or perceived age, race, creed, color, national origin, gender, disability, marital status, partnership status, caregiver status, sexual and reproductive health decisions, sexual orientation, uniformed service, height, weight, or immigration or citizenship status of any person: (1) To represent that any employment or position is not available when in fact it is available; (2) To refuse to hire or employ or to bar or to discharge from employment such person; or (3) To discriminate against such person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment. (b) For an employment agency or an employee or agent thereof to discriminate against any person because of such person's actual or perceived age, race, creed, color, national origin, gender, disability, marital status, partnership status, caregiver status, sexual and reproductive health decisions, sexual orientation, uniformed service, height, weight, or immigration or citizenship status in receiving, classifying, disposing or otherwise acting upon applications for its services, including by representing to such person that any employment or position is not available when in fact it is available, or in referring an applicant or applicants for its services to an employer or employers. (c) For a labor organization or an employee or agent thereof, because of the actual or perceived age, race, creed, color, national origin, gender, disability, marital status, partnership status, caregiver status, sexual and reproductive health decisions, sexual orientation, uniformed service, height, weight, or immigration or citizenship status of any person, to exclude or to expel from its membership such person, to represent that membership is not available when it is in fact available, or to discriminate in any way against any of its members or against any employer or any person employed by an employer. (d) For any employer, labor organization or employment agency or an employee or agent thereof to declare, print or circulate or cause to be declared, printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication, or to use any form of application for employment or to make any inquiry in connection with prospective employment, which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to age, race, creed, color, national origin, gender, disability, marital status, partnership status, caregiver status, sexual and reproductive health decisions, sexual orientation, uniformed service, height, weight, or immigration or citizenship status, or any intent to make any such limitation, specification or discrimination. (e) The provisions of this subdivision and subdivision 2 of this section: (i) as they apply to employee benefit plans, shall not be construed to preclude an employer from observing the provisions of any plan covered by the federal employment retirement income security act of 1974 that is in compliance with applicable federal discrimination laws where the application of the provisions of such subdivisions to such plan would be preempted by such act; (ii) shall not preclude the varying of insurance coverages according to an employee's age; (iii) shall not be construed to affect any retirement policy or system that is permitted pursuant to paragraphs (e) and (f) of subdivision 3- a of section 296 of the executive law; (iv) shall not be construed to affect the retirement policy or system of an employer where such policy or system is not a subterfuge to evade the purposes of this chapter. (f) The provisions of this subdivision do not govern the employment by an employer of the employer's parents, spouse, domestic partner, or children; provided, however, that such family members shall be counted as persons employed by an employer for the purposes of the definition of employer set forth in section 8-102. (g) (1) The provisions of this subdivision relating to height and weight shall not apply to an action by a covered entity based on a person’s height or weight when such action is (A) required by federal, state, or local law or regulation, or (B) permitted by regulation adopted by the commission identifying particular jobs or categories of jobs for which (i) a person’s height or weight could prevent performing the essential requisites of the job, and (ii) the commission has not found alternative action that covered entities could reasonably take to allow persons who do not meet the height or weight criteria to perform the essential requisites of the job or category of jobs, or (C) permitted by regulation adopted by the commission identifying particular jobs or categories of jobs for which consideration of height or weight criteria is reasonably necessary for the execution of the normal operations of such covered entity. (2) In instances where a covered entity’s action is not required by law or regulation or permitted by regulation as described in paragraph 1, it shall be an affirmative defense that (A) a person’s height or weight prevents the person from performing the essential requisites of the job, and there is no alternative action the covered entity could reasonably take that would allow the person to perform the essential requisites of the job, or (B) the covered entity’s decision based on height or weight criteria is reasonably necessary for the execution of the normal operations of such covered entity. (3) Nothing in this subdivision shall prevent a covered entity from offering incentives that support weight management as part of a voluntary wellness program. 2. Apprentice training programs. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an employer, labor organization, employment agency or any joint labor-management committee controlling apprentice training programs or an employee or agent thereof: (a) To select persons for an apprentice training program registered with the state of New York on any basis other than their qualifications, as determined by objective criteria which permit review. (b) To deny to or withhold from any person because of such person's actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, gender, age, disability, marital status, partnership status, sexual and reproductive health decisions, sexual orientation, uniformed service, height, weight, immigration or citizenship status or status as a victim of domestic violence or as a victim of sex offenses or stalking the right to be admitted to or participate in a guidance program, an apprentice training program, on-the-job training program, or other occupational training or retraining program, or to represent that such program is not available when in fact it is available. (c) To discriminate against any person in such person's pursuit of such program or to discriminate against such a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of such program because of actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, gender, age, disability, marital status, partnership status, sexual and reproductive health decisions, sexual orientation, uniformed service, height, weight, immigration or citizenship status or status as a victim of domestic violence or as a victim of sex offenses or stalking. (d) To declare, print or circulate or cause to be declared, printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication, or to use any form of application for such program or to make any inquiry in connection with such program which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, creed, color, national origin, gender, age, disability, marital status, partnership status, sexual and reproductive health decisions, sexual orientation, uniformed service, height, weight, immigration or citizenship status or status as a victim of domestic violence or as a victim of sex offenses or stalking, or any intent to make any such limitation, specification or discrimination. 3. Employment; religious observance. (a) It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an employer or an employee or agent thereof to impose upon a person as a condition of obtaining or retaining employment any terms or conditions, compliance with which would require such person to violate, or forego a practice of, such person's creed or religion, including but not limited to the observance of any particular day or days or any portion thereof as a sabbath or holy day or the observance of any religious custom or usage, and the employer shall make reasonable accommodation to the religious needs of such person. Without in any way limiting the foregoing, no person shall be required to remain at such person's place of employment during any day or days or portion thereof that, as a requirement of such person's religion, such person observes as a sabbath or other holy day, including a reasonable time prior and subsequent thereto for travel between such person's place of employment and such person's home, provided, however, that any such absence from work shall, wherever practicable in the judgment of the employer, be made up by an equivalent amount of time at some other mutually convenient time. (b) Reasonable accommodation, as used in this subdivision, shall mean such accommodation to an employee's or prospective employee's religious observance or practice as shall not cause undue hardship in the conduct of the employer's business. The employer shall have the burden of proof to show such hardship. Undue hardship as used in this subdivision shall mean an accommodation requiring significant expense or difficulty (including a significant interference with the safe or efficient operation of the workplace or a violation of a bona fide seniority system). Factors to be considered in determining whether the accommodation constitutes an undue economic hardship shall include, but not be limited to: (i) The identifiable cost of the accommodation, including the costs of loss of productivity and of retaining or hiring employees or transferring employees from one facility to another, in relation to the size and operating cost of the employer; (ii) The number of individuals who will need the particular accommodation to a sincerely held religious observance or practice; and (iii) For an employer with multiple facilities, the degree to which the geographic separateness or administrative or fiscal relationship of the facilities will make the accommodation more difficult or expensive. Provided, however, an accommodation shall be considered to constitute an undue hardship, for purposes of this subdivision, if it will result in the inability of an employee who is seeking a religious accommodation to perform the essential functions of the position in which the employee is employed. 4. Public accommodations. a. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person who is the owner, franchisor, franchisee, lessor, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent, agent or employee of any place or provider of public accommodation: 1. Because of any person's actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, age, gender, disability, marital status, partnership status, sexual orientation, uniformed service, height, weight, or immigration or citizenship status, directly or indirectly: (a) To refuse, withhold from or deny to such person the full and equal enjoyment, on equal terms and conditions, of any of the accommodations, advantages, services, facilities or privileges of the place or provider of public accommodation; or (b) To represent to any person that any accommodation, advantage, facility or privilege of any such place or provider of public accommodation is not available when in fact it is available; or 2. Directly or indirectly to make any declaration, publish, circulate, issue, display, post or mail any written or printed communication, notice or advertisement, to the effect that: (a) Full and equal enjoyment, on equal terms and conditions, of any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of any such place or provider of public accommodation shall be refused, withheld from or denied to any person on account of race, creed, color, national origin, age, gender, disability, marital status, partnership status, sexual orientation, uniformed service, height, weight, or immigration or citizenship status; or (b) The patronage or custom of any person is unwelcome, objectionable, not acceptable, undesired or unsolicited because of such person's actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, age, gender, disability, marital status, partnership status, sexual orientation, uniformed service, height, weight, or immigration or citizenship status. b. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this subdivision shall not apply, with respect to age or gender, to places or providers of public accommodation where the commission grants an exemption based on bona fide considerations of public policy. c. The provisions of this subdivision relating to discrimination on the basis of gender shall not prohibit any educational institution subject to this subdivision from making gender distinctions which would be permitted (i) for educational institutions which are subject to section 3201-a of the education law or any rules or regulations promulgated by the state commissioner of education relating to gender or (ii) under sections 86.32, 86.33 and 86.34 of title 45 of the code of federal regulations for educational institutions covered thereunder. d. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to preclude an educational institution – other than a publicly-operated educational institution – which establishes or maintains a policy of educating persons of one gender exclusively from limiting admissions to students of that gender. e. The provisions of this section relating to disparate impact shall not apply to the use of standardized tests as defined by section 340 of the education law by an educational institution subject to this subdivision provided that such test is used in the manner and for the purpose prescribed by the test agency which designed the test. f. The provisions of this subdivision as they relate to unlawful discriminatory practices by educational institutions shall not apply to matters that are strictly educational or pedagogic in nature. g. 1. The provisions of this subdivision relating to height and weight shall not apply to an action by a covered entity based on a person’s height or weight when such action is (i) required by federal, state, or local law or regulation; or (ii) permitted by regulation adopted by the commission allowing consideration of height or weight because such action is reasonably necessary for the normal operations of a particular place or provider of accommodation, or a category of such places or providers, and there is no alternative action the covered entity could reasonably take that would allow patrons to use or enjoy the accommodations, advantages, services, facilities, or privileges of the place or provider of public accommodation. 2. In instances where a covered entity’s action is not required by law or regulation or permitted by regulation as described in paragraph 1, it shall be an affirmative defense that a covered entity took an action based on a person’s height or weight because such action is reasonably necessary for its normal operations and there is no alternative action the covered entity could reasonably take that would allow patrons to use or enjoy the accommodations, advantages, services, facilities, or privileges of the place or provider of public accommodation. 5. Housing accommodations, land, commercial space and lending practices. (a) Housing accommodations. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for the owner, lessor, lessee, sublessee, assignee, or managing agent of, or other person having the right to sell, rent or lease or approve the sale, rental or lease of a housing accommodation, constructed or to be constructed, or an interest therein, or any agent or employee thereof: (1) Because of the actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, gender, age, disability, sexual orientation, uniformed service, height, weight, marital status, partnership status, or immigration or citizenship status of any person or group of persons, or because of any lawful source of income of such person or persons, or because children are, may be or would be residing with such person or persons: (a) To refuse to sell, rent, lease, approve the sale, rental or lease or otherwise deny to or withhold from any such person or group of persons such a housing accommodation or an interest therein; (b) To discriminate against any such person or persons in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any such housing accommodation or an interest therein or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or (c) To represent to such person or persons that any housing accommodation or an interest therein is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is available to such person. (2) To declare, print or circulate or cause to be declared, printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication, or to use any form of application for the purchase, rental or lease of such a housing accommodation or an interest therein or to make any record or inquiry in conjunction with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of such a housing accommodation or an interest therein which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, creed, color, national origin, gender, age, disability, sexual orientation, uniformed service, height, weight, marital status, partnership status, or immigration or citizenship status, or any lawful source of income, or whether children are, may be, or would be residing with a person, or any intent to make such limitation, specification or discrimination. (3) [Reserved.] (4) The provisions of this paragraph (a) shall not apply: (1) to the rental of a housing accommodation, other than a publicly-assisted housing accommodation, in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two families living independently of each other, if the owner members of the owner's family reside in one of such housing accommodations, and if the available housing accommodation has not been publicly advertised, listed, or otherwise offered to the general public; or (2) to the rental of a room or rooms in a housing accommodation, other than a publicly-assisted housing accommodation, if such rental is by the occupant of the housing accommodation or by the owner of the housing accommodation and the owner or members of the owner's family reside in such housing accommodation. (b) Land and commercial space. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for the owner, lessor, lessee, sublessee, or managing agent of, or other person having the right of ownership or possession of or the right to sell, rent, or lease, or approve the sale, rental or lease of land or commercial space or an interest therein, or any agency or employee thereof: (1) Because of the actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, gender, age, disability, sexual orientation, uniformed service, marital status, partnership status, or immigration or citizenship status of any person or group of persons, or because children are, may be or would be residing with any person or persons: (A) To refuse to sell, rent, lease, approve the sale, rental or lease or otherwise deny or to withhold from any such person or group of persons land or commercial space or an interest therein; (B) To discriminate against any such person or persons in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any such land or commercial space or an interest therein or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or (C) To represent to any person or persons that any land or commercial space or an interest therein is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is available. (2) To declare, print or circulate or cause to be declared, printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication, or to use any form of application for the purchase, rental or lease of such land or commercial space or an interest therein or to make any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of such land or commercial space or an interest therein which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, creed, color, national origin, gender, age, disability, sexual orientation, uniformed service, marital status, partnership status, or immigration or citizenship status, or whether children are, may be or would be residing with such person, or any intent to make any such limitation, specification or discrimination. (c) Real estate brokers. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any real estate broker, real estate salesperson or employee or agent thereof: (1) To refuse to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation, land or commercial space or an interest therein to any person or group of persons or to refuse to negotiate for the sale, rental or lease, of any housing accommodation, land or commercial space or an interest therein to any person or group of persons because of the actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, gender, age, disability, sexual orientation, uniformed service, marital status, partnership status, or immigration or citizenship status of such person or persons, or because of any lawful source of income of such person or persons, or because children are, may be or would be residing with such person or persons, or to represent that any housing accommodation, land or commercial space or an interest therein is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or otherwise to deny or withhold any housing accommodation, land or commercial space or an interest therein or any facilities of any housing accommodation, land or commercial space or an interest therein from any person or group of persons because of the actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, gender, age, disability, sexual orientation, uniformed service, marital status, partnership status, or immigration or citizenship status of such person or persons, or because of any lawful source of income of such person or persons, or because children are, may be or would be residing with such person or persons. (2) To declare, print or circulate or cause to be declared, printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication, or to use any form of application for the purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, land or commercial space or an interest therein or to make any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, land or commercial space or an interest therein which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, creed, color, national origin, gender, age, disability, sexual orientation, uniformed service, marital status, partnership status, or immigration or citizenship status, or any lawful source of income, or to whether children are, may be or would be residing with a person, or any intent to make such limitation, specification or discrimination. (3) To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any housing accommodation, land or commercial space or an interest therein by representations, explicit or implicit, regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood or area of a person or persons of any race, creed, color, gender, age, disability, sexual orientation, uniformed service, marital status, partnership status, national origin, immigration or citizenship status, or a person or persons with any lawful source of income, or a person or persons with whom children are, may be or would be residing. (d) Lending practices. (1) It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person, bank, trust company, private banker, savings bank, industrial bank, savings and loan association, credit union, investment company, mortgage company, insurance company, or other financial institution or lender, doing business in the city, including unincorporated entities and entities incorporated in any jurisdiction, or any officer, agent or employee thereof to whom application is made for a loan, mortgage or other form of financial assistance for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing accommodation, land or commercial space or an interest therein: (A) To discriminate against such applicant in the granting, withholding, extending or renewing, or in the fixing of rates, terms or conditions of any such financial assistance or in the appraisal of any housing accommodation, land or commercial space or an interest therein: (i) Because of the actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, gender, disability, sexual orientation, age, marital status, uniformed service, partnership status, or immigration or citizenship status of such applicant, any member, stockholder, director, officer or employee of such applicant, or the occupants or tenants or prospective occupants or tenants of such housing accommodation, land or commercial space; or (ii) Because children are, may be or would be residing with such applicant or other person. (B) To use any form of application for a loan, mortgage, or other form of financial assistance, or to make any record or inquiry in connection with applications for such financial assistance, or in connection with the appraisal of any housing accommodation, land or commercial space or an interest therein, which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, creed, color, national origin, gender, disability, sexual orientation, uniformed service, age, marital status, partnership status, or immigration or citizenship status, or whether children are, may be, or would be residing with a person. (2) It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person, bank, trust company, private banker, savings bank, industrial bank, savings and loan association, credit union, investment company, mortgage company, insurance company, or other financial institution or lender, doing business in the city, including unincorporated entities and entities incorporated in any jurisdiction, or any officer, agent or employee thereof to represent to any person that any type or term of loan, mortgage or other form of financial assistance for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of such housing accommodation, land or commercial space or an interest therein is not available when in fact it is available: (A) Because of the actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, gender, disability, sexual orientation, uniformed service, age, marital status, partnership status, or immigration or citizenship status of such person, any member, stockholder, director, officer or employee of such person, or the occupants or tenants or prospective occupants or tenants of such housing accommodation, land or commercial space; or (B) Because children are, may be or would be residing with a person. (e) Real estate services. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice, because of the actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, gender, disability, sexual orientation, uniformed service, age, marital status, partnership status, or immigration or citizenship status of any person or because children are, may be or would be residing with such person: (1) To deny such person access to, membership in or participation in a multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service; or (2) To represent to such person that access to or membership in such service or organization is not available, when in fact it is available. (f) Real estate related transactions. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person whose business includes the appraisal of housing accommodations, land or commercial space or interest therein or an employee or agent thereof to discriminate in making available or in the terms or conditions of such appraisal on the basis of the actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, gender, disability, sexual orientation, uniformed service, age, marital status, partnership status, or immigration or citizenship status of any person or because children are, may be or would be residing with such person. (g) Applicability; persons under 18 years of age. The provisions of this subdivision, as they relate to unlawful discriminatory practices in housing accommodations, land and commercial space or an interest therein and lending practices on the basis of age, shall not apply to unemancipated persons under the age of 18 years. (h) Applicability; discrimination against persons with children. The provisions of this subdivision with respect to discrimination against persons with whom children are, may be or would be residing shall not apply to housing for older persons as defined in paragraphs 2 and 3 of subdivision (b) of section 3607 of title 42 of the United States code and any regulations promulgated thereunder. (i) Applicability; senior citizen housing. The provisions of this subdivision with respect to discrimination on the basis of age shall not apply to the restriction of the sale, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, land or commercial space or an interest therein exclusively to persons 55 years of age or older. This paragraph shall not be construed to permit discrimination against such persons 55 years of age or older on the basis of whether children are, may be or would be residing in such housing accommodation or land or an interest therein unless such discrimination is otherwise permitted pursuant to paragraph (h) of this subdivision. (j) Applicability; dormitory residence operated by educational institution. The provisions of this subdivision relating to discrimination on the basis of gender in housing accommodations shall not prohibit any educational institution from making gender distinctions in dormitory residences which would be permitted under sections 86.32 and 86.33 of title 45 of the code of federal regulations for educational institutions covered thereunder. (k) Applicability; dormitory-type housing accommodations. The provisions of this subdivision which prohibit distinctions on the basis of gender and whether children are, may be or would be residing with a person shall not apply to dormitory-type housing accommodations including, but not limited to, shelters for the homeless where such distinctions are intended to recognize generally accepted values of personal modesty and privacy or to protect the health, safety or welfare of families with children. (l) Exemption for special needs of particular age group in publicly- assisted housing accommodations. Nothing in this subdivision shall restrict the consideration of age in the rental of publicly-assisted housing accommodations if the state division of human rights grants an exemption pursuant to section 296 of the executive law based on bona fide considerations of public policy for the purpose of providing for the special needs of a particular age group without the intent of prejudicing other age groups; provided however, that this paragraph shall not be construed to permit discrimination on the basis of whether children are, may be or would be residing in such housing accommodations unless such discrimination is otherwise permitted pursuant to paragraph (h) of this subdivision. (m) Applicability; use of criteria or qualifications in publicly- assisted housing accommodations. The provisions of this subdivision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of criteria or qualifications of eligibility for the sale, rental, leasing or occupancy of publicly-assisted housing accommodations where such criteria or qualifications are required to comply with federal or state law, or are necessary to obtain the benefits of a federal or state program, or to prohibit the use of statements, advertisements, publications, applications or inquiries to the extent that they state such criteria or qualifications or request information necessary to determine or verify the eligibility of an applicant, tenant, purchaser, lessee or occupant. (n) Discrimination on the basis of occupation prohibited in housing accommodations. Where a housing accommodation or an interest therein is sought or occupied exclusively for residential purposes, the provisions of this subdivision shall be construed to prohibit discrimination on account of a person's occupation in: (1) The sale, rental, or leasing of such housing accommodation or interest therein; (2) The terms, conditions and privileges of the sale, rental or leasing of such housing accommodation or interest therein; (3) Furnishing facilities or services in connection therewith; and (4) Representing whether or not such housing accommodation or interest therein is available for sale, rental, or leasing. (o) Protections based on criminal history; housing. (1) It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for the owner, lessor, lessee, sublessee, assignee, or managing agent of, or other person having the right to sell, rent or lease or approve the sale, rental or lease of a housing accommodation, constructed or to be constructed, or an interest therein, or any agent or employee thereof, or any real estate broker or agent or employee thereof to: (A) Refuse to sell, rent, lease, approve the sale, rental or lease or otherwise deny to or withhold from any individual such a housing accommodation or an interest therein because of such individual’s criminal history, other than an individual’s reviewable criminal history obtained and considered in conformity with this paragraph; (B) Discriminate against any individual in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale, rental, or lease of any such housing accommodation or an interest therein or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith, because of such individual’s criminal history; (C) Represent to any individual that any housing accommodation or an interest therein is not available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease because of such individual’s criminal history, except when consideration of such criminal history is permitted by, and the covered entity has complied with, the procedures required under this paragraph; (D) Declare, print, or circulate, or cause to be declared, printed, or circulated, any statement, advertisement, or publication, or use any form of application for the purchase, rental or lease of such a housing accommodation or an interest therein, which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification, or discrimination in housing because of an individual’s criminal history; except as permitted under this paragraph; or (E) Conduct a criminal background check in connection with the prospective purchase, or prospective or continuing rental or lease, of a housing accommodation, except where conducted in conformity with this paragraph. (2) Nothing in subparagraph (1) shall prohibit a covered entity from taking any lawful adverse action against an individual, including a current occupant, for reasons other than such individual’s criminal history, including acts of physical violence committed by such individual against other persons or property on the premises, or other acts that would adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of other residents, nor shall such paragraph excuse a covered entity from complying with applicable laws relating to victims of domestic violence, sex offenses, or stalking. (3) Nothing in subparagraph (1) shall: (A) Prohibit a covered entity from making any statement, communication, advertisement, publication, or application that is required or specifically authorized by a federal, state or local law, rule, or regulation, provided that any such statement, communication, advertisement, publication, or application shall include a citation to the law, rule, or regulation that requires or permits such action; (B) Prohibit a covered entity from denying a housing accommodation based on an individual’s criminal history where such denial is required or specifically authorized by federal, state, or local law, rule, or regulation, provided that such covered entity shall provide such individual with notice of the law, rule, or regulation that requires or specifically authorizes such action and, where the law permits but does not require an adverse action, provided that such covered entity complies with the requirements of subparagraphs (4), (5), and (6) of this paragraph; or (C) Prohibit a covered entity from conducting a criminal background check pursuant to any federal, state, or local law, rule, or regulation that requires or specifically authorizes a criminal background check for housing eligibility, provided that, where the law permits but does not require an adverse action, such covered entity complies with the requirements of subparagraphs (4), (5), and (6) of this paragraph. (4) Preliminary determination and notice of criminal background check. Except where following this process would conflict with a requirement of federal or state law, rule, or regulation, a covered entity that intends to conduct a criminal background check of an individual in connection with a prospective purchase, or prospective or continuing rental or lease of a housing accommodation, shall not conduct such criminal background check until such covered entity has taken the following actions: (A) In the case of a transaction involving the purchase of housing or shares in housing, the seller has accepted an offer and agreed in writing that the seller will not revoke the acceptance or change the conditions of the deal on the basis of the buyer’s criminal history except as permitted by this paragraph; (B) In the case of any other transaction involving lease or rental, the covered entity has provided to such individual a rental or lease agreement that commits the housing accommodation to the applicant, which may only be revoked based on a criminal background check conducted in accordance with the fair chance housing process set forth in subparagraph (5), or upon an unrelated material omission, misrepresentation, or change in the qualifications for tenancy that was not known at the time of the conditional offer; (C) In all such cases, has provided such individual notice of such criminal background check and a written copy of the city’s fair chance housing notice summarizing the rights in this paragraph, which shall be created and made publicly available by the commission. (5) Fair chance housing process. After providing notice of a criminal background check, and prior to taking any adverse action because of an individual’s reviewable criminal history, and except where such action conflicts with a requirement of federal or state law, rule, or regulation, the covered entity shall: (A) Provide the applicant a written copy of: (i) Any information or records about reviewable criminal history based on which the covered entity intends to take adverse action; (ii) Any information about such individual’s criminal history, other than their reviewable criminal history, that the covered entity received, even if the covered entity did not consider such information in making its determination; and (iii) Provide notice that such individual may, no later than five business days following the receipt of such information, submit to the covered entity any information identifying errors in the criminal history information provided by the covered entity, and any supplemental or mitigating information in support of their application for purchase, rental, or lease. (6) Adverse action based on reviewable criminal history. If, after conducting the fair chance housing process pursuant to subparagraph (5) of this paragraph, a covered entity considers taking adverse action because of an individual’s reviewable criminal history, such covered entity shall first: (A) Conduct an individualized assessment of the individual’s reviewable criminal history and timely information submitted by such individual pursuant to subparagraph (5) of this paragraph; and (B) Provide such individual with a written copy of the reason for the adverse action, including: (i) A copy of supporting documents that were reviewed; and (ii) A written statement of the reason for such adverse action, demonstrating: (i) how the individual’s reviewable criminal history is relevant to a legitimate business interest of the property owner, and (ii) how any information submitted in support of such individual’s tenancy was taken into account. (7) If a covered entity utilizes a third party to conduct a consumer background check or criminal background check on their behalf, such covered entity shall take reasonable steps to ensure that such check is conducted consistent with the provisions of this paragraph. Except where a covered entity’s actions are required or authorized pursuant to federal, state, or local law, a covered entity may be liable for relying on criminal history other than reviewable criminal history if the covered entity failed to take reasonable steps to ensure compliance with this paragraph. Where a covered entity knowingly receives criminal history information other than reviewable criminal history information, such receipt creates a rebuttable presumption that the covered entity relied on such information in violation of this paragraph, which such covered entity may rebut by affirmatively showing that they complied with the fair housing process described in subparagraphs (4), (5), and (6) and did not rely on such information in making a determination about a sale, rental, or lease. (8) This paragraph shall not apply to the sale or rental of: (A) A housing accommodation, other than a publicly-assisted housing accommodation, in a building that contains housing accommodations for not more than two families living independently of each other, if the owner or members of the owner's family reside in one of such housing accommodations; or (B) A room or rooms in a housing accommodation, other than a publicly-assisted housing accommodation, if such rental is by the occupant of the housing accommodation or by the owner of the housing accommodation and the owner or members of the owner's family reside in such housing accommodation. (9) A covered entity shall be immune from liability in any civil action arising as a result of an alleged act of an individual with a criminal history based on the claim that the covered entity should not have sold, rented or leased, or otherwise granted a housing accommodation or an interest therein, to such individual or as a result of a covered entity's decision not to perform a criminal background check. (p) For purposes of this paragraph, the term CityFHEPS means the city fighting homelessness and eviction prevention supplement program established pursuant to chapter 10 of title 68 of the rules of the city of New York or any successor program. The commission shall develop and disseminate a written notice of protections of this subdivision related to lawful source of income. The notice shall be made available to the department of social services for use in accordance with section 21-141.1. The notice shall include, at a minimum, the following information: (1) Examples of different forms of lawful source of income; (2) A description of covered entities required not to discriminate on the basis of lawful sources of income; (3) Examples of actions that may indicate discrimination based on lawful source of income in violation of title 8, such as refusing to accept lawful source of income for rent payment, publishing any type of advertisement that indicates a refusal to accept any lawful source of income, and refusing or delaying repairs because a person uses any lawful source of income for rent payment, publishing any type of advertisement that indicates a refusal to accept any lawful source of income, and any additional actions landlords or brokers use to unlawfully discriminate against a person on the basis of their using any lawful source of income; (4) A statement that it is illegal for covered entities to refuse to accept a CityFHEPS subsidy for payment of rent or a security deposit voucher in buildings subject to the prohibition on discrimination on the basis of lawful source of income pursuant to section 8-107; (5) A statement that it is illegal for covered entities to request additional payments for rent, a security deposit or broker's fee because an individual receives rental assistance; (6) A statement that it is illegal for covered entities to publish any type of advertisement that indicates a refusal to accept rental assistance; (7) A statement that it is illegal for landlords to refuse or delay making repairs to an individual's unit because such individual pays rent with a CityFHEPS subsidy; (8) A statement that an individual has the right to be free from discriminatory, harassing or threatening behavior or comments based on such individual's receipt of or application for CityFHEPS; (9) Directions on how to contact the commission, the department of social services' source of income discrimination unit, the state division of human rights and the office of the state attorney general; (10) A description of potential remedies available at the commission if a covered entity is found to have engaged in discrimination based on lawful source of income; and (11) Any other information deemed appropriate by the commissioner and the commission in consultation with the department of social services. 6. Aiding and abetting. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any of the acts forbidden under this chapter, or to attempt to do so. 7. Retaliation. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person engaged in any activity to which this chapter applies to retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any person because such person has (i) opposed any practice forbidden under this chapter, (ii) filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any proceeding under this chapter, (iii) commenced a civil action alleging the commission of an act which would be an unlawful discriminatory practice under this chapter, (iv) assisted the commission or the corporation counsel in an investigation commenced pursuant to this title, (v) requested a reasonable accommodation under this chapter, or (vi) provided any information to the commission pursuant to the terms of a conciliation agreement made pursuant to section 8-115 of this chapter. The retaliation or discrimination complained of under this subdivision need not result in an ultimate action with respect to employment, housing or a public accommodation or in a materially adverse change in the terms and conditions of employment, housing, or a public accommodation, provided, however, that the retaliatory or discriminatory act or acts complained of must be reasonably likely to deter a person from engaging in protected activity. 8. Violation of conciliation agreement. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any party to a conciliation agreement made pursuant to section 8-115 of this chapter to violate the terms of such agreement. 9. Licenses, registrations and permits. (a) It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice: (1) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph c of this subdivision, for an agency authorized to issue a license, registration or permit or an employee thereof to falsely deny the availability of such license, registration or permit, or otherwise discriminate against an applicant, or a putative or prospective applicant for a license, registration or permit because of the actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, age, gender, marital status, partnership status, disability, sexual orientation, uniformed service or immigration or citizenship status of such applicant. (2) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (c) of this subdivision, for an agency authorized to issue a license, registration or permit or an employee thereof to declare, print or circulate or cause to be declared, printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication, or to use any form of application for a license, registration or permit or to make any inquiry in connection with any such application, which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, creed, color, national origin, age, gender, marital status, partnership status, disability, sexual orientation, uniformed service or immigration or citizenship status, or any intent to make any such limitation, specification or discrimination. (3) For any person to deny any license, registration or permit to any applicant, or act adversely upon any holder of a license, registration or permit by reason of such applicant or holder having been convicted of one or more criminal offenses, or by reason of a finding of a lack of good moral character which is based on such applicant or holder having been convicted of one or more criminal offenses, when such denial or adverse action is in violation of the provisions of article 23-a of the correction law. (4) For any person to make any inquiry in writing or otherwise about, or deny any license, registration or permit to any applicant for, or act adversely upon any holder of a license, registration or permit, by reason of such applicant or holder having been arrested or accused of committing a crime, when such inquiry, denial or adverse action is in violation of subdivision 16 of section 296 of article 15 of the executive law. (5) Unless specifically required by law, for any person to make any inquiry in writing or otherwise about, or deny any license, registration or permit to any applicant, or act adversely upon any applicant for or holder of a license, registration or permit by reason of: (i) such applicant or holder having a conviction for a violation as defined in section 10.00 of the penal law; (ii) such applicant or holder having been convicted of a non- criminal offense, as defined by a law of another state; or (iii) an arrest or criminal accusation which was followed by a conviction described in this subparagraph. (iv) This subparagraph does not apply to any license, registration, or permit issued by the business integrity commission. (b) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, it shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an agency to request or use for licensing, registration or permitting purposes information contained in the consumer credit history of an applicant, licensee, registrant or permittee for licensing or permitting purposes. (2) Subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall not apply to an agency required by state or federal law or regulations to use an individual's consumer credit history for licensing, registration or permitting purposes. (3) Subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall not be construed to affect the ability of an agency to consider an applicant's, licensee's, registrant's or permittee's failure to pay any tax, fine, penalty, or fee for which liability has been admitted by the person liable therefor, or for which judgment has been entered by a court or administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or any tax for which a government agency has issued a warrant, or a lien or levy on property. (4) Nothing in this paragraph shall preclude a licensing agency from requesting, receiving, or using consumer credit history information obtained pursuant to a lawful subpoena, court order or law enforcement investigation. (c) The prohibition of this subdivision relating to inquiries, denials or other adverse action related to a person's record of arrests or convictions shall not apply to licensing activities in relation to the regulation of explosives, pistols, handguns, rifles, shotguns, or other firearms and deadly weapons. Nothing contained in this subdivision shall be construed to bar an agency authorized to issue a license, registration or permit from using age, disability, criminal conviction or arrest record as a criterion for determining eligibility or continuing fitness for a license, registration or permit when specifically required to do so by any other provision of law. (d) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, it shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an agency to request or use for licensing or permitting purposes information contained in the consumer credit history of an applicant, licensee or permittee. (2) Subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall not apply to an agency required by state or federal law or regulations to use an individual's consumer credit history for licensing or permitting purposes. (3) Subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall not be construed to affect the ability of an agency to consider an applicant's, licensee's, registrant's or permittee's failure to pay any tax, fine, penalty, or fee for which liability has been admitted by the person liable therefor, or for which judgment has been entered by a court or administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or any tax for which a government agency has issued a warrant, or a lien or levy on property. (4) Nothing in this paragraph shall preclude a licensing agency from requesting, receiving, or using consumer credit history information obtained pursuant to a lawful subpoena, court order or law enforcement investigation. (e) The provisions of this subdivision shall be enforceable against public agencies and employees thereof by a proceeding brought pursuant to article 78 of the civil practice law and rules. 10. Employment actions based on pending arrests and criminal accusations, and criminal convictions preceding and during employment. (a) Actions prohibited by state law concerning criminal convictions preceding employment. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any employer, employment agency or agent thereof to deny employment to any person or take adverse action against any employee by reason of such person or employee having been convicted of one or more criminal offenses, or by reason of finding the person lacks good moral character based on such person or employee having been convicted of one or more criminal offenses, when such denial or adverse action is in violation of the provisions of article 23-A of the correction law. (b) Criminal convictions during employment. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any employer, employment agency or agent thereof to take adverse action against any employee by reason of such person having been convicted during their employment of one or more criminal offenses, or by reason of finding the person lacks good moral character based on such person having been convicted during their employment of one or more criminal offenses, unless, after considering the relevant fair chance factors, the employer determines that either (i) there is a direct relationship between the criminal conviction and the employment held by the person; or (ii) the continuation of the employment would involve an unreasonable risk to property, or to the safety or welfare of specific individuals or the general public. (c) Pending arrests and criminal accusations preceding and during employment. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any employer, employment agency or agent thereof to take adverse action against any applicant or employee based on an arrest or criminal accusation that is pending, or by reason of finding the person lacks good moral character based on such a pending arrest or criminal accusation, unless, after considering the relevant fair chance factors, the employer determines that either (i) there is a direct relationship between the alleged wrongdoing that is the subject of the pending arrest or criminal accusation and the employment sought or held by the person; or (ii) the granting or continuation of the employment would involve an unreasonable risk to property or to the safety or welfare of specific individuals or the general public. (d) For purposes of paragraphs (b) and (c), placing an employee on unpaid leave for a reasonable time while the employer takes the steps described in such paragraphs and subdivision 11-a of this section shall not be deemed to be an adverse action. (e) For purposes of this subdivision, an action that has been adjourned in contemplation of dismissal shall not be considered a pending action unless the order to adjourn in contemplation of dismissal is revoked and the case is restored to the calendar for further prosecution. (f) Paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subdivision shall not apply to an applicant for employment or a current employee employed (i) as a police officer or peace officer, as those terms are defined in subdivisions 33 and 34 of section 1.20 of the criminal procedure law, respectively, or (ii) at a law enforcement agency as that term is used in article 23-A of the correction law. (g) Nothing in this section shall prevent an employer from taking adverse action against an applicant or employee who is found to have made intentional misrepresentations regarding their arrest or conviction history, provided that such adverse action is not based on a failure to divulge information that a person may not be required to divulge, as provided in subdivision 16 of section 296 of article 15 of the executive law and in subdivision 11 of this section, and provided further that the employer provides the applicant or employee with a copy of the documents that formed the basis of the determination that an intentional misrepresentation was made and gives the person a reasonable time to respond. (h) Paragraphs (b) and (c) shall not apply to public agencies taking adverse action against an employee based upon a pending arrest or criminal accusation that preceded or arose during employment, or convictions that occurred during employment, where the employee is entitled to a disciplinary process as set forth in section 75 of the civil service law, or where the public agency follows a disciplinary process set forth in agency rules or as required by law. (i) The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply where a mandatory forfeiture, disability or bar to employment is imposed by law and has not been removed by an executive pardon, certificate of relief from disabilities or certificate of good conduct. (j) The provisions of this subdivision shall be enforceable against public agencies by a proceeding brought pursuant to article 78 of the civil practice law and rules, and the provisions of this subdivision shall be enforceable against other employers by the commission through the administrative procedure provided for in this chapter or as provided in chapter 5 of this title. 11. Non-pending arrests and criminal accusations, and dispositions of charges that an employer may not consider. (a) Non-pending arrests and criminal accusations; adjournments in contemplation of dismissal; youthful offender adjudications; convictions sealed pursuant to certain sections of the criminal procedure law. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice, unless specifically required or permitted by any other law, for any person to make any inquiry in writing or otherwise about, or deny employment to, any applicant or act adversely upon any employee by reason of an arrest of or criminal accusation against such applicant or employee when such inquiry, denial or adverse action is in violation of subdivision 16 of section 296 of article 15 of the executive law. (b) Violations and non-criminal offenses that have not been sealed. (1) It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any employer, employment agency or agent thereof to make any inquiry in writing or otherwise about, or deny employment to any person or take adverse action against any employee, based on the applicant or employee having: (i) been convicted of a violation as defined in section 10.00 of the penal law; or (ii) been convicted of a non-criminal offense, as defined by a law of another state. (2) It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any employer, employment agency or agent thereof to make any inquiry in writing or otherwise about, or deny employment to any person or take adverse action against any employee based on an arrest or criminal accusation that was followed by an order or conviction described in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph. (3) The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to an applicant for employment or a current employee employed (i) as a police officer or peace officer, as those terms are defined in subdivisions 33 and 34 of section 1.20 of the criminal procedure law, respectively, or (ii) at a law enforcement agency as that term is used in article 23-A of the correction law. (4) The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply where a mandatory forfeiture, disability or bar to employment is imposed by law and has not been removed by an executive pardon, certificate of relief from disabilities or certificate of good conduct. (5) The provisions of paragraph (b) shall be enforceable against public agencies by a proceeding brought pursuant to article 78 of the civil practice law and rules, and the provisions of this subdivision shall be enforceable against other employers by the commission through the administrative procedure provided for in this chapter or as provided in chapter 5 of this title. 11-a. Arrest and conviction records preceding and during employment; employer inquiries and fair chance process. (a) In addition to the restrictions in subdivisions 10 and 11 of this section, it shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any employer, employment agency or agent thereof to: (1) Declare, print or circulate or cause to be declared, printed or circulated any solicitation, advertisement or publication, which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, or specification in employment based on a person's arrest or criminal conviction; (2) Because of any person's arrest or criminal conviction, represent that any employment or position is not available, when in fact it is available to such person; or (3) Make any inquiry or statement related to the pending arrest or criminal accusation, or criminal conviction record of any person who is in the process of applying for a position with such employer or agent thereof until after such employer or agent thereof has extended a conditional offer of employment to the applicant. For purposes of this subdivision, with respect to an applicant for temporary employment at a temporary help firm as such term is defined by subdivision 5 of section 916 of article 31 of the labor law, an offer to be placed in the temporary help firm's general candidate pool shall constitute a conditional offer of employment. For purposes of this subdivision, any inquiry means any question communicated to an applicant in writing or otherwise, or any searches of publicly available records or consumer reports that are conducted for the purpose of obtaining an applicant's criminal background information, and any statement means a statement communicated in writing or otherwise to the applicant for purposes of obtaining an applicant's criminal background information regarding: (i) an arrest record; (ii) a conviction record; or (iii) a criminal background check. (b) After extending an applicant a conditional offer of employment, an employer, employment agency or agent thereof may inquire about the applicant's arrest or conviction record if before taking any adverse employment action based on such inquiry, the employer, employment agency or agent thereof: (1) Provides a written copy of the inquiry to the applicant in a manner to be determined by the commission; (2) Requests from the applicant information relating to the relevant fair chance factors; (3) Performs an analysis as required by paragraphs (a) and (c) of subdivision 10 of this section; (4) Provides a written copy of such analysis to the applicant in a manner to be determined by the commission, which shall include but not be limited to supporting documents that formed the basis for an adverse action based on such analysis and the employer's or employment agency's reasons for taking any adverse action against such applicant; and (5) After giving the applicant the inquiry and analysis in writing, allows the applicant a reasonable time to respond, which shall be no less than five business days and during this time, holds the position open for the applicant. (c) Before taking any adverse employment action against a current employee based on a criminal conviction, or pending arrest or criminal accusation, the employer, employment agency or agent thereof shall: (1) Request from the employee information relating to the relevant fair chance factors; (2) Perform an analysis as required by paragraphs (b) and (c) of subdivision 10 of this section; (3) Provide a written copy of such analysis to the employee in a manner to be determined by the commission, which shall include but not be limited to supporting documents that formed the basis for an adverse action based on such analysis and the employer's or employment agency's reasons for taking any adverse action against such employee; and (4) After giving the employee the inquiry and analysis in writing, allow the employee a reasonable time to respond before taking adverse action. (d) Paragraph (c) of this subdivision shall not apply: (1) If a public agency takes adverse action against an employee based upon a pending arrest or criminal accusation that preceded or arose during employment or a conviction that occurred during employment, where the employee is entitled to a disciplinary process as set forth in section 75 of the civil service law, or where the public agency follows a disciplinary process set forth in agency rules or as required by law; or (2) If a mandatory forfeiture, disability or bar to employment is imposed by law and has not been removed by an executive pardon, certificate of relief from disabilities or certificate of good conduct. (e) Nothing in this subdivision shall prevent an employer, employment agency or agent thereof from taking adverse action against any employee or denying employment to any applicant for reasons other than such employee or applicant's arrest or criminal conviction record. (f) An applicant shall not be required to respond to any inquiry or statement that violates paragraph (a) of this subdivision and any refusal to respond to such inquiry or statement shall not disqualify an applicant from the prospective position. (g) This subdivision shall not apply to any actions taken by an employer or agent thereof: (1) With regard to an applicant for employment or a current employee employed as a police officer or peace officer, as those terms are defined in subdivisions 33 and 34 of section 1.20 of the criminal procedure law, respectively, or at a law enforcement agency as that term is used in article 23-A of the correction law, including but not limited to the police department, the fire department, the department of correction, the department of investigation, the department of probation, the division of child protection and the division of youth and family justice of the administration for children's services, the business integrity commission, and the district attorneys' offices; or (2) With regard to an applicant for employment or a current employee employed in any position listed in the determinations of personnel published as a commissioner's calendar item and listed on the website of the department of citywide administrative services upon a determination by the commissioner of citywide administrative services that the position involves law enforcement, is susceptible to bribery or other corruption, or entails the provision of services to or safeguarding of persons who, because of age, disability, infirmity or other condition, are vulnerable to abuse. If the employer takes adverse action against any applicant or employee based on the person's arrest or criminal conviction record, it shall provide to the person a written copy, in a form and manner to be determined by the department, of an analysis considering the relevant fair chance factors and concluding that either (i) there is a direct relationship between criminal history or alleged wrongdoing and the employment sought or held by the person; or (ii) the granting or continuation of the employment would involve an unreasonable risk to property or to the safety or welfare of specific individuals or the general public; or (3) Pursuant to any federal, state or local law requiring criminal background checks for employment purposes or barring employment based on criminal history. For purposes of this paragraph federal law shall include rules or regulations promulgated by a self-regulatory organization as defined in section 3(a)(26) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended. (h) The provisions of this subdivision shall be enforceable against public agencies by a proceeding brought pursuant to article 78 of the civil practice law and rules, and the provisions of this subdivision shall be enforceable against private employers by the commission through the administrative procedure provided for in this chapter or as provided in chapter 5 of this title. 11-b. Arrest record; credit application. For purposes of issuing credit, it shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice, unless specifically required or permitted by any other law, to: (a) Deny or act adversely upon any person seeking credit by reason of an arrest or criminal accusation of such person when such denial or adverse action is in violation of subdivision 16 of section 296 of article 15 of the executive law; (b) Make any inquiry in writing or otherwise, regarding any arrest or criminal accusation of a person seeking credit when such inquiry is in violation of subdivision 16 of section 296 of article 15 of the executive law; or (c) Because of any arrest or criminal accusation of a person seeking credit, represent to such person that credit is not available, when in fact it is available to such person. 12. Religious principles. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to bar any religious or denominational institution or organization or any organization operated for charitable or educational purposes, which is operated, supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious organization, from limiting employment or sales or rentals of housing accommodations or admission to or giving preference to persons of the same religion or denomination or from making such selection as is calculated by such organization to promote the religious principles for which it is established or maintained. 13. Employer liability for discriminatory conduct by employee, agent or independent contractor. a. An employer shall be liable for an unlawful discriminatory practice based upon the conduct of an employee or agent which is in violation of any provision of this section other than subdivisions 1 and 2 of this section. b. An employer shall be liable for an unlawful discriminatory practice based upon the conduct of an employee or agent which is in violation of subdivision 1 or 2 of this section only where: (1) The employee or agent exercised managerial or supervisory responsibility; or (2) The employer knew of the employee's or agent's discriminatory conduct, and acquiesced in such conduct or failed to take immediate and appropriate corrective action; an employer shall be deemed to have knowledge of an employee's or agent's discriminatory conduct where that conduct was known by another employee or agent who exercised managerial or supervisory responsibility; or (3) The employer should have known of the employee's or agent's discriminatory conduct and failed to exercise reasonable diligence to prevent such discriminatory conduct. c. An employer shall be liable for an unlawful discriminatory practice committed by a person employed as an independent contractor, other than an agent of such employer, to carry out work in furtherance of the employer's business enterprise only where such discriminatory conduct was committed in the course of such employment and the employer had actual knowledge of and acquiesced in such conduct. d. Where liability of an employer has been established pursuant to this section and is based solely on the conduct of an employee, agent, or independent contractor, the employer shall be permitted to plead and prove to the discriminatory conduct for which it was found liable it had: (1) Established and complied with policies, programs and procedures for the prevention and detection of unlawful discriminatory practices by employees, agents and persons employed as independent contractors, including but not limited to: (i) A meaningful and responsive procedure for investigating complaints of discriminatory practices by employees, agents and persons employed as independent contractors and for taking appropriate action against those persons who are found to have engaged in such practices; (ii) A firm policy against such practices which is effectively communicated to employees, agents and persons employed as independent contractors; (iii) A program to educate employees and agents about unlawful discriminatory practices under local, state, and federal law; and (iv) Procedures for the supervision of employees and agents and for the oversight of persons employed as independent contractors specifically directed at the prevention and detection of such practices; and (2) A record of no, or relatively few, prior incidents of discriminatory conduct by such employee, agent or person employed as an independent contractor or other employees, agents or persons employed as independent contractors. e. The demonstration of any or all of the factors listed above in addition to any other relevant factors shall be considered in mitigation of the amount of civil penalties to be imposed by the commission pursuant to this chapter or in mitigation of civil penalties or punitive damages which may be imposed pursuant to chapter 4 or 5 of this title and shall be among the factors considered in determining an employer's liability under subparagraph 3 of paragraph b of this subdivision. f. The commission may establish by rule policies, programs and procedures which may be implemented by employers for the prevention and detection of unlawful discriminatory practices by employees, agents and persons employed as independent contractors. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, an employer found to be liable for an unlawful discriminatory practice based solely on the conduct of an employee, agent or person employed as an independent contractor who pleads and proves that such policies, programs and procedures had been implemented and complied with at the time of the unlawful conduct shall not be liable for any civil penalties which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter or any civil penalties or punitive damages which may be imposed pursuant to chapter 4 or 5 of this title for such unlawful discriminatory practices. 14. Applicability; immigration or citizenship status. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, it shall not be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person to discriminate on the ground of immigration or citizenship status, or to make any inquiry as to a person's immigration or citizenship status, or to give preference to a person who is a citizen or national of the United States over an equally qualified person who is not a citizen or national of the United States, when such discrimination is required or when such preference is expressly permitted by any law or regulation of the United States, the state of New York or the city, and when such law or regulation does not provide that state or local law may be more protective of a person who is not a citizen or national of the United States; provided, however, that this provision shall not prohibit inquiries or determinations based on immigration or citizenship status when such actions are necessary to obtain the benefits of a federal program. An applicant for a license or permit issued by the city may be required to be authorized to work in the United States whenever by law or regulation there is a limit on the number of such licenses or permits which may be issued. 15. Applicability; persons with disabilities. (a) Requirement to make reasonable accommodation to the needs of persons with disabilities. Except as provided in paragraph (b), it is an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person prohibited by the provisions of this section from discriminating on the basis of disability not to provide a reasonable accommodation to enable a person with a disability to satisfy the essential requisites of a job or enjoy the right or rights in question provided that the disability is known or should have been known by the covered entity. (b) Affirmative defense in disability cases. In any case where the need for reasonable accommodation is placed in issue, it shall be an affirmative defense that the person aggrieved by the alleged discriminatory practice could not, with reasonable accommodation, satisfy the essential requisites of the job or enjoy the right or rights in question. (c) Use of drugs or alcohol. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit a covered entity from (i) prohibiting the illegal use of drugs or the use of alcohol at the workplace or on duty impairment from the illegal use of drugs or the use of alcohol, or (ii) conducting drug testing which is otherwise lawful. 16. [Repealed.] 17. Disparate impact. a. An unlawful discriminatory practice based upon disparate impact is established when: (1) The commission or a person who may bring an action under chapter 4 or 5 of this title demonstrates that a policy or practice of a covered entity or a group of policies or practices of a covered entity results in a disparate impact to the detriment of any group protected by the provisions of this chapter; and (2) The covered entity fails to plead and prove as an affirmative defense that each such policy or practice bears a significant relationship to a significant business objective of the covered entity or does not contribute to the disparate impact; provided, however, that if the commission or such person who may bring an action demonstrates that a group of policies or practices results in a disparate impact, the commission or such person shall not be required to demonstrate which specific policies or practices within the group results in such disparate impact; provided further, that a policy or practice or group of policies or practices demonstrated to result in a disparate impact shall be unlawful where the commission or such person who may bring an action produces substantial evidence that an alternative policy or practice with less disparate impact is available to the covered entity and the covered entity fails to prove that such alternative policy or practice would not serve the covered entity as well. Significant business objective shall include, but not be limited to, successful performance of the job. b. The mere existence of a statistical imbalance between a covered entity's challenged demographic composition and the general population is not alone sufficient to establish a prima facie case of disparate impact violation unless the general population is shown to be the relevant pool for comparison, the imbalance is shown to be statistically significant and there is an identifiable policy or practice or group of policies or practices that allegedly causes the imbalance. c. Nothing contained in this subdivision shall be construed to mandate or endorse the use of quotas; provided, however, that nothing contained in this subdivision shall be construed to limit the scope of the commission's authority pursuant to sections 8-115 and 8-120 of this chapter or to affect court-ordered remedies or settlements that are otherwise in accordance with law. 18. Unlawful boycott or blacklist. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice (i) for any person to discriminate against, boycott or blacklist or to refuse to buy from, sell to or trade with, any person, because of such person's actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, gender, disability, age, marital status, partnership status, sexual orientation, uniformed service or immigration or citizenship status or of such person's partners, members, stockholders, directors, officers, managers, superintendents, agents, employees, business associates, suppliers or customers, or (ii) for any person willfully to do any act or refrain from doing any act which enables any such person to take such action. This subdivision shall not apply to: (a) Boycotts connected with labor disputes; (b) Boycotts to protest unlawful discriminatory practices; or (c) Any form of expression that is protected by the First Amendment. 19. Interference with protected rights. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with, or attempt to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with, any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of such person having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected pursuant to this section. 20. Relationship or association. The provisions of this section set forth as unlawful discriminatory practices shall be construed to prohibit such discrimination against a person because of the actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, disability, age, sexual orientation, uniformed service or immigration or citizenship status of a person with whom such person has a known relationship or association. 21. Employment; an individual's unemployment. a. Prohibition of discrimination based on an individual's unemployment. (1) Except as provided in paragraphs b and c of this subdivision, an employer, employment agency, or agent thereof shall not: (a) Because of a person's unemployment, represent that any employment or position is not available when in fact it is available; or (b) Base an employment decision with regard to hiring, compensation or the terms, conditions or privileges of employment on an applicant's unemployment. (2) Unless otherwise permitted by city, state or federal law, no employer, employment agency, or agent thereof shall publish, in print or in any other medium, an advertisement for any job vacancy in this city that contains one or more of the following: (a) Any provision stating or indicating that being currently employed is a requirement or qualification for the job; (b) Any provision stating or indicating that an employer, employment agency, or agent thereof will not consider individuals for employment based on their unemployment. b. Effect of subdivision. (1) Paragraph a of this subdivision shall not be construed to prohibit an employer, employment agency, or agent thereof from (a) considering an applicant's unemployment, where there is a substantially job-related reason for doing so; or (b) inquiring into the circumstances surrounding an applicant's separation from prior employment. (2) Nothing set forth in this subdivision shall be construed as prohibiting an employer, employment agency, or agent thereof, when making employment decisions with regard to hiring, compensation, or the terms, conditions or privileges of employment, from considering any substantially job- related qualifications, including but not limited to: a current and valid professional or occupational license; a certificate, registration, permit, or other credential; a minimum level of education or training; or a minimum level of professional, occupational, or field experience. (3) Nothing set forth in this subdivision shall be construed as prohibiting an employer, employment agency, or agent thereof from publishing, in print or in any other medium, an advertisement for any job vacancy in this city that contains any provision setting forth any substantially job-related qualifications, including but not limited to: a current and valid professional or occupational license; a certificate, registration, permit, or other credential; a minimum level of education or training; or a minimum level of professional, occupational, or field experience. (4) (a) Nothing set forth in this subdivision shall be construed as prohibiting an employer, employment agency, or agent thereof, when making employment decisions with regard to hiring, compensation, or the terms, conditions or privileges of employment, from determining that only applicants who are currently employed by the employer will be considered for employment or given priority for employment or with respect to compensation or terms, conditions or privileges of employment. In addition, nothing set forth in this subdivision shall prevent an employer from setting compensation or terms or conditions of employment for a person based on that person's actual amount of experience. (b) For the purposes of this subparagraph, all persons whose salary or wages are paid from the city treasury, and all persons who are employed by public agencies or entities headed by officers or boards including one or more individuals appointed or recommended by officials of the city, shall be deemed to have the same employer. c. Applicability of subdivision. (1) This subdivision shall not apply to: (a) Actions taken by the department of citywide administrative services in furtherance of its responsibility for city personnel matters pursuant to chapter 35 of the charter or as a municipal civil service commission administering the civil service law and other applicable laws, or by the mayor in furtherance of the mayor's duties relating to city personnel matters pursuant to chapter 35 of the charter, including, but not limited to, the administration of competitive examinations, the establishment and administration of eligible lists, and the establishment and implementation of minimum qualifications for appointment to positions; (b) Actions taken by officers or employees of other public agencies or entities charged with performing functions comparable to those performed by the department of citywide administrative services or the mayor as described in paragraph 1 of this subdivision; (c) Agency appointments to competitive positions from eligible lists pursuant to subsection 1 of section 61 of the civil service law; or (d) The exercise of any right of an employer or employee pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement. (2) This subdivision shall apply to individual hiring decisions made by an agency or entity with respect to positions for which appointments are not required to be made from an eligible list resulting from a competitive examination. d. Public education campaign. The commission shall develop courses of instruction and conduct ongoing public education efforts as necessary to inform employers, employment agencies, and job applicants about their rights and responsibilities under this subdivision. e. Disparate impact. An unlawful discriminatory practice based on disparate impact under this subdivision is established when: (1) the commission or a person who may bring an action under chapter 4 or 5 of this title demonstrates that a policy or practice of an employer, employment agency, or agent thereof, or a group of policies or practices of such an entity results in a disparate impact to the detriment of any group protected by the provisions of this subdivision; and (2) such entity fails to plead and prove as an affirmative defense that each such policy or practice has as its basis a substantially job-related qualification or does not contribute to the disparate impact; provided, however, that if the commission or such person who may bring an action demonstrates that a group of policies or practices results in a disparate impact, the commission or such person shall not be required to demonstrate which specific policies or practices within the group results in such disparate impact; provided further, that a policy or practice or group of policies or practices demonstrated to result in a disparate impact shall be unlawful where the commission or such person who may bring an action produces substantial evidence that an alternative policy or practice with less disparate impact is available to such entity and such entity fails to prove that such alternative policy or practice would not serve such entity as well. A substantially job-related qualification shall include, but not be limited to, a current and valid professional or occupational license; a certificate, registration, permit, or other credential; a minimum level of education or training; or a minimum level of professional, occupational, or field experience. 22. Employment; Pregnancy, childbirth, or a related medical condition. (a) It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an employer to refuse to provide a reasonable accommodation, as defined in section 8-102, to the needs of an employee for the employee's pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical condition that will allow the employee to perform the essential requisites of the job, provided that such employee's pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical condition is known or should have been known by the employer. In any case pursuant to this subdivision where the need for reasonable accommodation is placed in issue, it shall be an affirmative defense that the person aggrieved by the alleged discriminatory practice could not, with reasonable accommodation, satisfy the essential requisites of the job. (b) Employer lactation accommodation. (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, employers shall provide the following to accommodate an employee needing to express breast milk: (1) a lactation room in reasonable proximity to such employee's work area; and (2) a refrigerator suitable for breast milk storage in reasonable proximity to such employee's work area. (ii) If a room designated by an employer to serve as a lactation room is also used for another purpose, the sole function of the room shall be as a lactation room while an employee is using the room to express breast milk. When an employee is using the room to express milk, the employer shall provide notice to other employees that the room is given preference for use as a lactation room. (iii) Should the provision of a lactation room as required by this paragraph pose an undue hardship on an employer, the employer shall engage in a cooperative dialogue, as required by subdivision 28 of this section. (iv) The presence of a lactation room pursuant to this subdivision shall not affect an individual's right to breastfeed in public pursuant to article 7 of the civil rights law. (c) Employer lactation room accommodation policy. (i) An employer shall develop and implement a written policy regarding the provision of a lactation room, which shall be distributed to all employees upon hiring. The policy shall include a statement that employees have a right to request a lactation room, and identify a process by which employees may request a lactation room. This process shall: (1) Specify the means by which an employee may submit a request for a lactation room; (2) Require that the employer respond to a request for a lactation room within a reasonable amount of time not to exceed five business days; (3) Provide a procedure to follow when two or more individuals need to use the lactation room at the same time, including contact information for any follow up required; (4) State that the employer shall provide reasonable break time for an employee to express breast milk pursuant to section 206-c of the labor law; and (5) State that if the request for a lactation room poses an undue hardship on the employer, the employer shall engage in a cooperative dialogue, as required by subdivision 28 of this section. (ii) The commission shall, in collaboration with the department of health and mental hygiene, develop a model lactation room accommodation policy that conforms to the requirements of this subdivision and a model lactation room request form. The commission shall make such model policy and request form available on its website. (iii) The existence of a lactation room accommodation policy pursuant to this subdivision shall not affect an individual's right to breastfeed in public pursuant to article 7 of the civil rights law. (d) Notice of rights. (i) An employer shall provide written notice in a form and manner to be determined by the commission of the right to be free from discrimination in relation to pregnancy, childbirth, and related medical conditions pursuant to this subdivision to new employees at the commencement of employment. Such notice may also be conspicuously posted at an employer's place of business in an area accessible to employees. (ii) The commission shall develop courses of instruction and conduct ongoing public education efforts as necessary to inform employers, employees, employment agencies, and job applicants about their rights and responsibilities under this subdivision. (e) This subdivision shall not be construed to affect any other provision of law relating to discrimination on the basis of gender, or in any way to diminish the coverage of pregnancy, childbirth, or a medical condition related to pregnancy or childbirth under any other provision of this section. 23. Additional provisions relating to employment; interns, freelancers, independent contractors, and domestic workers. The protections of this chapter relating to employees apply to interns, freelancers and independent contractors. The protections of this chapter relating to employees also apply to a person's employment of one or more domestic workers as defined in subdivision 16 of section 2 of the labor law, without regard to the number of other employees such person has in their employ, provided however that subdivisions (10), (11-a) and paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of subdivision (22) shall not apply. 24. Employment; consumer credit history. (a) Except as provided in this subdivision, it shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an employer, labor organization, employment agency, or agent thereof to request or to use for employment purposes the consumer credit history of an applicant for employment or employee, or otherwise discriminate against an applicant or employee with regard to hiring, compensation, or the terms, conditions or privileges of employment based on the consumer credit history of the applicant or employee. (b) Paragraph (a) of this subdivision shall not apply to: (1) An employer or agent thereof, that is required by state or federal law or regulations or by a self-regulatory organization as defined in section 3(a)(26) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended to use an individual's consumer credit history for employment purposes; (2) Persons applying for positions as or employed: (A) As police officers or peace officers, as those terms are defined in subdivisions 33 and 34 of section 1.20 of the criminal procedure law, respectively, or in a position with a law enforcement or investigative function at the department of investigation; (B) In a position that is subject to background investigation by the department of investigation, provided, however, that the appointing agency may not use consumer credit history information for employment purposes unless the position is an appointed position in which a high degree of public trust, as defined by the commission in rules, has been reposed; (C) In a position in which an employee is required to be bonded under city, state or federal law; (D) In a position in which an employee is required to possess security clearance under federal law or the law of any state; (E) In a non-clerical position having regular access to trade secrets, intelligence information or national security information; (F) In a position: (i) having signatory authority over third party funds or assets valued at $10,000 or more; or (ii) that involves a fiduciary responsibility to the employer with the authority to enter financial agreements valued at $10,000 or more on behalf of the employer; or (G) In a position with regular duties that allow the employee to modify digital security systems established to prevent the unauthorized use of the employer's or client's networks or databases. (c) Paragraph (a) of this subdivision shall not be construed to affect the obligations of persons required by section 12-110 or by mayoral executive order relating to disclosures by city employees to the conflicts of interest board to report information regarding their creditors or debts, or the use of such information by government agencies for the purposes for which such information is collected. (d) Nothing in this subdivision precludes an employer from requesting or receiving consumer credit history information pursuant to a lawful subpoena, court order or law enforcement investigation. 25. Employment; inquiries regarding salary history. (a) For purposes of this subdivision, to inquire means to communicate any question or statement to an applicant, an applicant's current or prior employer, or a current or former employee or agent of the applicant's current or prior employer, in writing or otherwise, for the purpose of obtaining an applicant's salary history, or to conduct a search of publicly available records or reports for the purpose of obtaining an applicant's salary history, but does not include informing the applicant in writing or otherwise about the position's proposed or anticipated salary or salary range. For purposes of this subdivision, salary history includes the applicant's current or prior wage, benefits or other compensation. Salary history does not include any objective measure of the applicant's productivity such as revenue, sales, or other production reports. (b) Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, it is an unlawful discriminatory practice for an employer, employment agency, or employee or agent thereof: 1. To inquire about the salary history of an applicant for employment; or 2. To rely on the salary history of an applicant in determining the salary, benefits or other compensation for such applicant during the hiring process, including the negotiation of a contract. (c) Notwithstanding paragraph (b) of this subdivision, an employer, employment agency, or employee or agent thereof may, without inquiring about salary history, engage in discussion with the applicant about their expectations with respect to salary, benefits and other compensation, including but not limited to unvested equity or deferred compensation that an applicant would forfeit or have cancelled by virtue of the applicant's resignation from their current employer. (d) Notwithstanding subparagraph 2 of paragraph (b) of this subdivision, where an applicant voluntarily and without prompting discloses salary history to an employer, employment agency, or employee or agent thereof, such employer, employment agency, or employee or agent thereof may consider salary history in determining salary, benefits and other compensation for such applicant, and may verify such applicant's salary history. (e) This subdivision shall not apply to: (1) Any actions taken by an employer, employment agency, or employee or agent thereof pursuant to any federal, state or local law that specifically authorizes the disclosure or verification of salary history for employment purposes, or specifically requires knowledge of salary history to determine an employee's compensation; (2) Applicants for internal transfer or promotion with their current employer; (3) Any attempt by an employer, employment agency, or employee or agent thereof, to verify an applicant's disclosure of non-salary related information or conduct a background check, provided that if such verification or background check discloses the applicant's salary history, such disclosure shall not be relied upon for purposes of determining the salary, benefits or other compensation of such applicant during the hiring process, including the negotiation of a contract; or (4) Public employee positions for which salary, benefits or other compensation are determined pursuant to procedures established by collective bargaining. 26. Applicability; uniformed service. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section and except as otherwise provided by law, it is not an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person to afford any other person a preference or privilege based on such other person's uniformed service, or to declare, print or circulate or cause to be declared, printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication, or to use any form of application or make any inquiry indicating any such lawful preference or privilege. 27. Victims of domestic violence, sex offenses or stalking. a. Employment. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an employer, or an agent thereof, because of any individual's actual or perceived status as a victim of domestic violence, or as a victim of sex offenses or stalking: (1) To represent that any employment or position is not available when in fact it is available; (2) To refuse to hire or employ or to bar or to discharge from employment; or (3) To discriminate against an individual in compensation or other terms, conditions, or privileges of employment. b. Requirement to make reasonable accommodation to the needs of victims of domestic violence, sex offenses or stalking. Except as provided in paragraph d, it is an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person prohibited by paragraph a from discriminating on the basis of actual or perceived status as a victim of domestic violence or a victim of sex offenses or stalking not to provide a reasonable accommodation to enable a person who is a victim of domestic violence, or a victim of sex offenses or stalking to satisfy the essential requisites of a job provided that the status as a victim of domestic violence or a victim of sex offenses or stalking is known or should have been known by the covered entity. c. Documentation of status. Any person required by paragraph b to make reasonable accommodation may require a person requesting reasonable accommodation pursuant to such paragraph to provide certification that the person is a victim of domestic violence, sex offenses or stalking. The person requesting reasonable accommodation pursuant to such paragraph shall provide a copy of such certification to the covered entity within a reasonable period after the request is made. A person may satisfy the certification requirement of this paragraph by providing documentation from an employee, agent, or volunteer of a victim services organization, an attorney, a member of the clergy, or a medical or other professional service provider, from whom the individual seeking a reasonable accommodation or that individual's family or household member has sought assistance in addressing domestic violence, sex offenses or stalking and the effects of the violence or stalking; a police or court record; or other corroborating evidence. All information provided to the covered entity pursuant to this paragraph, including a statement of the person requesting a reasonable accommodation or any other documentation, record, or corroborating evidence, and the fact that the individual has requested or obtained a reasonable accommodation pursuant to this subdivision, shall be retained in the strictest confidence by the covered entity, except to the extent that disclosure is requested or consented to in writing by the person requesting the reasonable accommodation, or otherwise required by applicable federal, state or local law. d. Affirmative defense in domestic violence, sex offenses or stalking cases. In any case where the need for reasonable accommodation is placed in issue, it shall be an affirmative defense that the person aggrieved by the alleged discriminatory practice could not, with reasonable accommodation, satisfy the essential requisites of the job or enjoy the right or rights in question. e. Housing accommodations. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for the owner, lessor, lessee, sublessee, assignee, or managing agent of, or other person having the right to sell, rent or lease or approve the sale, rental or lease of a housing accommodation, constructed or to be constructed, or an interest therein, or any agent or employee thereof, because of any individual's actual or perceived status as a victim of domestic violence, or as a victim of sex offenses or stalking: (1) To refuse to sell, rent, lease, approve the sale, rental or lease or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of persons such a housing accommodation or an interest therein, or to discriminate in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any such housing accommodation or an interest therein or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith because of an actual or perceived status of said individual as a victim of domestic violence, or as a victim of sex offenses or stalking; or (2) To represent that such housing accommodation or an interest therein is not available when in fact it is available. f. The provisions of paragraph e shall not apply: (1) To the rental of a housing accommodation, other than a publicly- assisted housing accommodation, in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two families living independently of each other, if the owner or members of the owner's family reside in one of such housing accommodations, and if the available housing accommodation has not been publicly advertised, listed, or otherwise offered to the general public; or (2) To the rental of a room or rooms in a housing accommodation, other than a publicly-assisted housing accommodation, if such rental is by the occupant of the housing accommodation or by the owner of the housing accommodation and the owner or members of the owner's family reside in such housing accommodation. g. For the purposes of this subdivision, practices based on, because of, on account of, as to, on the basis of, or motivated by an individual's status as a victim of domestic violence, or status as a victim of sex offenses or stalking include, but are not limited to, those based solely upon the actions of a person who has perpetrated acts or threats of violence against the individual. 28. Reasonable accommodation; cooperative dialogue. (a) Employment. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an employer, labor organization or employment agency or an employee or agent thereof to refuse or otherwise fail to engage in a cooperative dialogue within a reasonable time with a person who has requested an accommodation or who the covered entity has notice may require such an accommodation: (1) For religious needs as provided in subdivision 3 of this section; (2) Related to a disability as provided in subdivision 15 of this section; (3) Related to pregnancy, childbirth or a related medical condition as provided in subdivision 22 of this section; or (4) For such person's needs as a victim of domestic violence, sex offenses or stalking as provided in subdivision 27 of this section. (b) Public accommodations. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for any person who is the owner, franchisor, franchisee, lessor, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent, agent or employee of any place or provider of public accommodation to refuse or otherwise fail to engage in a cooperative dialogue within a reasonable time with a person who has requested an accommodation or who the covered entity has notice may require an accommodation related to disability as provided in subdivision 15 of this section. (c) Housing accommodation. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an owner, lessor, lessee, sublessee, assignee, or managing agent of, or other person having the right to sell, rent or lease or approve the sale, rental or lease of a housing accommodation, constructed or to be constructed, or an interest therein, or any agency or employee thereof to refuse or otherwise fail to engage in a cooperative dialogue within a reasonable time with a person who has requested an accommodation or who the covered entity has notice may require an accommodation related to disability as provided in subdivision 15 of this section. (d) Upon reaching a final determination at the conclusion of a cooperative dialogue pursuant to paragraphs (a) and (c) of this subdivision, the covered entity shall provide any person requesting an accommodation who participated in the cooperative dialogue with a written final determination identifying any accommodation granted or denied. (e) The determination that no reasonable accommodation would enable the person requesting an accommodation to satisfy the essential requisites of a job or enjoy the right or rights in question may only be made after the parties have engaged, or the covered entity has attempted to engage, in a cooperative dialogue. (f) Rights and obligations set forth in this subdivision are supplemental to and independent of the rights and obligations provided by subdivisions 3, 15, 22 and 27. A covered entity's compliance with this subdivision is not a defense to a claim of not providing a reasonable accommodation under provisions of title 8 other than this subdivision. 29. Anti-sexual harassment rights and responsibilities; poster. (a) Every employer must conspicuously display an anti-sexual harassment rights and responsibilities poster designed by the commission, in employee breakrooms or other common areas employees gather. Every employer at a minimum shall display such poster in English and in Spanish. (b) The commission shall create a poster that sets forth in simple and understandable terms the following minimum requirements: (1) An explanation of sexual harassment as a form of unlawful discrimination under local law; (2) A statement that sexual harassment is also a form of unlawful discrimination under state and federal law; (3) A description of sexual harassment, using examples; (4) The complaint process available through, and directions on how to contact, the commission; (5) The complaint process available through, and directions on how to contact, the state division of human rights; (6) The complaint process available through, and directions on how to contact, the United States equal employment opportunity commission; and (7) The prohibition against retaliation, pursuant to subdivision 7 of section 8-107. (c) The size and style of the poster shall be at least 8 1/2 by 14 inches with a minimum 12 point type. Such poster shall be made available in English and Spanish and any other language deemed appropriate by the commission, however, any such poster shall only contain one language. (d) Any poster required pursuant to this section shall be made available on the commission's website for employers to download for legible color reproduction in English, Spanish and any other language deemed appropriate by the commission. (e) The commission shall develop an information sheet on sexual harassment that employers shall distribute to individual employees at the time of hire. Such information sheet may be included in an employee handbook. Such information sheet shall contain, at a minimum, the same elements of paragraph (b) of this subdivision. The information sheet shall be made available in English and Spanish and any other language deemed appropriate by the commission. 30. Anti-sexual harassment training. (a) Definitions. For purposes of this subdivision, the following terms have the following meanings: Interactive training. The term interactive training means participatory teaching whereby the trainee is engaged in a trainer-trainee interaction, use of audio-visuals, computer or online training program or other participatory forms of training as determined by the commission. However, such interactive training is not required to be live or facilitated by an in- person instructor in order to satisfy the provisions of this subdivision. (b) Training. Employers with 15 or more employees shall annually conduct an anti-sexual harassment interactive training for all employees, including supervisory and managerial employees, of such employer employed within the city of New York. Such training shall be required after 90 days of initial hire for employees who work more than 80 hours in a calendar year who perform work on a full-time or part-time basis. Such training shall include, but need not be limited to, the following: (1) An explanation of sexual harassment as a form of unlawful discrimination under local law; (2) A statement that sexual harassment is also a form of unlawful discrimination under state and federal law; (3) A description of what sexual harassment is, using examples; (4) Any internal complaint process available to employees through their employer to address sexual harassment claims; (5) The complaint process available through the commission, the division of human rights and the United States equal employment opportunity commission, including contact information; (6) The prohibition of retaliation, pursuant to subdivision 7 of section 8-107, and examples thereof; and (7) Information concerning bystander intervention, including but not limited to any resources that explain how to engage in bystander intervention. (8) The specific responsibilities of supervisory and managerial employees in the prevention of sexual harassment and retaliation, and measures that such employees may take to appropriately address sexual harassment complaints. (c) Compliance. (1) Employers shall keep a record of all trainings, including a signed employee acknowledgement. Such acknowledgment may be electronic. (2) Employers shall maintain such records for at least three years and such records must be made available for commission inspection upon request. (3) The commission shall develop an online interactive training module that may be used by an employer as an option to satisfy the requirements of paragraph (b) of this subdivision, provided that an employer shall inform all employees of any internal complaint process available to employees through their employer to address sexual harassment claims. Such training module shall be made publicly available at no cost on the commission's website. Such training module shall allow for the electronic provision of certification each time any such module is accessed and completed. The commission shall update such modules as needed. (4) The training required by this subdivision is intended to establish a minimum threshold and shall not be construed to prohibit any private employer from providing more frequent or additional anti-sexual harassment training. (d) For purposes of this subdivision the term employer shall not apply to (i) the United States government; (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state including the legislature and the judiciary; or (iii) the city of New York or any local government, municipality or county or any entity governed by section 92 of the general municipal law or section 207 of the county law. (e) For purposes of this subdivision the term employee shall apply to interns. (f) An employee who has received anti-sexual harassment training at one employer within the required training cycle shall not be required to receive additional anti-sexual harassment training at another employer until the next cycle. (g) An employer that is subject to training requirements in multiple jurisdictions may assert that it is compliant with this subdivision provided that each provision in subparagraph b of this subdivision is fulfilled in an anti-sexual harassment training that such employer makes available to its employees on an annual basis and shall be allowed to provide proof of compliance. 31. Employment; pre-employment drug testing policy. (a) Prohibition. Except as otherwise provided by law, it shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an employer, labor organization, employment agency, or agent thereof to require a prospective employee to submit to testing for the presence of any tetrahydrocannabinols or marijuana in such prospective employee's system as a condition of employment. (b) Exceptions. (1) The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to persons applying to work: (A) As police officers or peace officers, as those terms are defined in subdivisions 33 and 34 of section 1.20 of the criminal procedure law, respectively, or in a position with a law enforcement or investigative function at the department of investigation; (B) In any position requiring compliance with section 3321 of the New York city building code or section 220-h of the labor law; (C) In any position requiring a commercial driver's license; (D) In any position requiring the supervision or care of children, medical patients or vulnerable persons as defined in paragraph 15 of section 488 of the social services law; or (E) In any position with the potential to significantly impact the health or safety of employees or members of the public, as determined by: (i) the commissioner of citywide administrative services for the classified service of the city of New York, and identified on the website of the department of citywide administrative services or (ii) the chairperson, and identified in regulations promulgated by the commission. (2) The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to drug testing required pursuant to: (A) Any regulation promulgated by the federal department of transportation that requires testing of a prospective employee in accordance with 49 CFR 40 or any rule promulgated by the departments of transportation of this state or city adopting such regulation for purposes of enforcing the requirements of that regulation with respect to intrastate commerce; (B) Any contract entered into between the federal government and an employer or any grant of financial assistance from the federal government to an employer that requires drug testing of prospective employees as a condition of receiving the contract or grant; (C) Any federal or state statute, regulation, or order that requires drug testing of prospective employees for purposes of safety or security; or (D) Any applicants whose prospective employer is a party to a valid collective bargaining agreement that specifically addresses the pre- employment drug testing of such applicants. (c) Rules. The commission shall promulgate rules for the implementation of this subdivision. 32. Employment; minimum and maximum salary in job listings. (a) It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for an employment agency, employer, or employee or agent thereof to advertise a job, promotion or transfer opportunity without stating the minimum and maximum annual salary or hourly wage for such position in such advertisement. In stating the minimum and maximum annual salary or hourly wage for a position, the range may extend from the lowest to the highest annual salary or hourly wage the employer in good faith believes at the time of the posting it would pay for the advertised job, promotion or transfer opportunity. (b) This subdivision does not apply to: (1) A job advertisement for temporary employment at a temporary help firm as such term is defined by subdivision 5 of section 916 of article 31 of the labor law; and (2) Positions that cannot or will not be performed, at least in part, in the city of New York. (c) No person shall have a cause of action pursuant to section 8-502 for an alleged violation of this subdivision, except that an employee may bring such an action against their current employer for an alleged violation of this subdivision in relation to an advertisement by their employer for a job, promotion or transfer opportunity with such employer. (d) Notwithstanding the penalties outlined in section 8-126, an employment agency, employer, or employee or agent thereof shall be subject to a civil penalty of $0 for a first violation of this subdivision, or any rule promulgated thereunder, if such employment agency, employer, employee or agent thereof proves to the satisfaction of the commission, within 30 days of the service of a copy of the applicable complaint pursuant to section 8-109, that the violation of this subdivision has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the commission as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any service of a copy of an applicable complaint pursuant to section 8-109 to an employment agency, employer, or employee or agent thereof for the violation of this subdivision, or any rule promulgated thereunder, for the first time. The commission shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. An employment agency, employer, or employee or agent thereunder may seek review with the commission of the determination that proof of a cure has not been submitted within 15 days of receiving written notice of such determination. §8-107.1 Victims of domestic violence, sex offenses or stalking repealed. § 8-108 Reserved. § 8-108.2 Unlawful discriminatory practices – occupation repealed. § 8-109 Complaint. (a) Any person aggrieved by an unlawful discriminatory practice or an act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title, or such person's attorney, may make, sign and file with the commission a verified complaint in writing which shall: (i) state the name of the person alleged to have committed the unlawful discriminatory practice or act of discriminatory harassment or violence complained of, and the address of such person if known; (ii) set forth the particulars of the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice or act of discriminatory harassment or violence; and (iii) contain such other information as may be required by the commission. The commission shall acknowledge the filing of the complaint and advise the complainant of the time limits set forth in this chapter. (b) Any employer whose employee or agent refuses or threatens to refuse to cooperate with the provisions of this chapter may file with the commission a verified complaint asking for assistance by conciliation or other remedial action. (c) Commission-initiated complaints. The commission may itself make, sign and file a verified complaint alleging that a person has committed an unlawful discriminatory practice or an act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (d) The commission shall serve a copy of the complaint upon the respondent and all persons it deems to be necessary parties and shall advise the respondent of the respondent's procedural rights and obligations as set forth herein. (e) The commission shall not have jurisdiction over any complaint that has been filed more than one year after the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice or act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title occurred; provided, however, that the commission shall have jurisdiction over a claim of gender-based harassment if such claim is filed within three years after the alleged harassing conduct occurred. (e-1) Any provision of an agreement involving an employer, employment agency, or agent thereof pertaining to terms of employment that purports to shorten the periods in which a complaint or claim may be filed pursuant to subdivision (e) is unenforceable and void as against public policy. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to affect the enforceability of any provision of any agreement other than a provision limiting the period in which a complaint or claim may be filed. (f) The commission shall not have jurisdiction to entertain a complaint if: (i) The complainant has previously initiated a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction alleging an unlawful discriminatory practice as defined by this chapter or an act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title with respect to the same grievance which is the subject of the complaint under this chapter, unless such civil action has been dismissed without prejudice or withdrawn without prejudice; or (ii) The complainant has previously filed and has an action or proceeding before any administrative agency under any other law of the state alleging an unlawful discriminatory practice as defined by this chapter or an act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title with respect to the same grievance which is the subject of the complaint under this chapter; or (iii) The complainant has previously filed a complaint with the state division of human rights alleging an unlawful discriminatory practice as defined by this chapter or an act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title with respect to the same grievance which is the subject of the complaint under this chapter and a final determination has been made thereon. (g) In relation to complaints filed on or after September 1, 1991, the commission shall commence proceedings with respect to the complaint, complete a thorough investigation of the allegations of the complaint and make a final disposition of the complaint promptly and within the time periods to be prescribed by rule of the commission. If the commission is unable to comply with the time periods specified for completing its investigation and for final disposition of the complaint, it shall notify the complainant, respondent, and any necessary party in writing of the reasons for not doing so. (h) Any complaint filed pursuant to this section may be amended pursuant to procedures prescribed by rule of the commission by filing such amended complaint with the commission and serving a copy thereof upon all parties to the proceeding. (i) Whenever a complaint is filed pursuant to paragraph (d) of subdivision 5 of section 8-107, no member of the commission nor any member of the commission staff shall make public in any manner whatsoever the name of any borrower or identify by a specific description the collateral for any loan to such borrower except when ordered to do so by a court of competent jurisdiction or where express permission has been first obtained in writing from the lender and the borrower to such publication; provided, however, that the name of any borrower and a specific description of the collateral for any loan to such borrower may, if otherwise relevant, be introduced in evidence in any hearing before the commission or any review by a court of competent jurisdiction of any order or decision by the commission. § 8-110 Reserved. § 8-111 Answer. a. Within 30 days after a copy of the complaint is served upon the respondent by the commission, the respondent shall file a written, verified answer thereto with the commission, and the commission shall cause a copy of such answer to be served upon the complainant and any necessary party. b. The respondent shall specifically admit, deny, or explain each of the facts alleged in the complaint, unless the respondent is without knowledge or information sufficient to form a belief, in which case the respondent shall so state, and such statement shall operate as a denial. c. Any allegation in the complaint not specifically denied or explained shall be deemed admitted and shall be so found by the commission unless good cause to the contrary is shown. d. All affirmative defenses shall be stated separately in the answer. e. Upon request of the respondent and for good cause shown, the period within which an answer is required to be filed may be extended in accordance with the rules of the commission. f. Any necessary party may file with the commission a written, verified answer to the complaint, and the commission shall cause a copy of such answer to be served upon the complainant, respondent and any other necessary party. g. Any answer filed pursuant to this section may be amended pursuant to procedures prescribed by rule of the commission by filing such amended answer with the commission and serving a copy thereof upon the complainant and any necessary party to the proceeding. § 8-112 Withdrawal of complaints. a. A complaint filed pursuant to section 8-109 of this chapter may be withdrawn by the complainant in accordance with rules of the commission at any time prior to the service of a notice that the complaint has been referred to an administrative law judge. Such a withdrawal shall be in writing and signed by the complainant. b. A complaint may be withdrawn after the service of such notice at the discretion of the commission. c. Unless such complaint is withdrawn pursuant to a conciliation agreement, the withdrawal of a complaint shall be without prejudice: 1. To the continued prosecution of the complaint by the commission in accordance with rules of the commission; 2. To the initiation of a complaint by the commission based in whole or in part upon the same facts; or 3. To the commencement of a civil action by the corporation counsel based upon the same facts pursuant to chapter 4 of this title. § 8-113 Dismissal of complaint. a. The commission may, in its discretion, dismiss a complaint for administrative convenience at any time prior to the taking of testimony at a hearing. Administrative convenience shall include, but not be limited to, the following circumstances: 1. Commission personnel have been unable to locate the complainant after diligent efforts to do so; 2. The complainant has repeatedly failed to appear at mutually agreed upon appointments with commission personnel or is unwilling to meet with commission personnel, provide requested documentation, or to attend a hearing; 3. The complainant has repeatedly engaged in conduct which is disruptive to the orderly functioning of the commission; 4. The complainant is unwilling to accept a reasonable proposed conciliation agreement; 5. Prosecution of the complaint will not serve the public interest; and 6. The complainant requests such dismissal, 180 days have elapsed since the filing of the complaint with the commission and the commission finds (a) that the complaint has not been actively investigated, and (b) that the respondent will not be unduly prejudiced thereby. b. The commission shall dismiss a complaint for administrative convenience at any time prior to the filing of an answer by the respondent, if the complainant requests such dismissal, unless the commission has conducted an investigation of the complaint or has engaged the parties in conciliation after the filing of the complaint. c. In accordance with the rules of the commission, the commission shall dismiss a complaint if the complaint is not within the jurisdiction of the commission. d. If after investigation the commission determines that probable cause does not exist to believe that the respondent has engaged or is engaging in an unlawful discriminatory practice or an act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title, the commission shall dismiss the complaint as to such respondent. e. The commission shall promptly serve notice upon the complainant, respondent and any necessary party of any dismissal pursuant to this section. f. The complainant or respondent may, within 30 days of such service, and in accordance with the rules of the commission, apply to the chairperson for review of any dismissal pursuant to this section. Upon such application, the chairperson shall review such action and issue an order affirming, reversing or modifying such determination or remanding the matter for further investigation and action. A copy of such order shall be served upon the complainant, respondent and any necessary party. § 8-114 Investigations and investigative record keeping. a. The commission may at any time issue subpoenas requiring attendance and giving of testimony by witnesses and the production of books, papers, documents and other evidence relating to any matter under investigation or any question before the commission. The issuance of such subpoenas shall be governed by the civil practice law and rules. b. Where the commission has initiated its own investigation or has conducted an investigation in connection with the filing of a complaint pursuant to this chapter, the commission may demand that any person or persons who are the subject of such investigation (i) preserve those records in the possession of such person or persons which are relevant to the determination of whether such person or persons have committed unlawful discriminatory practices or other acts made unlawful by this chapter or chapter 6 of this title with respect to activities in the city, and (ii) continue to make and keep the type of records made and kept by such person or persons in the ordinary course of business within the year preceding such demand which are relevant to the determination of whether such person or persons have committed unlawful discriminatory practices or other acts made unlawful by this chapter or chapter 6 of this title with respect to activities in the city. A demand made pursuant to this subdivision shall be effective immediately upon its service on the subject of an investigation and shall remain in effect until the termination of all proceedings relating to any complaint filed pursuant to this chapter or civil action commenced pursuant to chapter 4 of this title or if no complaint or civil action is filed or commenced shall expire two years after the date of such service. The commission's demand shall require that such records be made available for inspection by the commission, be filed with the commission, or both. c. Any person upon whom a demand has been made pursuant to subdivision b of this section may, pursuant to procedures established by rule of the commission, assert an objection to such demand. Unless the commission orders otherwise, the assertion of an objection shall not stay compliance with the demand. The commission shall make a determination on an objection to a demand within 30 days after such an objection is filed with the commission, unless the party filing the objection consents to an extension of time. d. Upon the expiration of the time set pursuant to such rules for making an objection to such demand, or upon a determination that an objection to the demand shall not be sustained, the commission shall order compliance with the demand. e. Upon a determination that an objection to a demand shall be sustained, the commission shall order that the demand be vacated or modified. f. A proceeding may be brought on behalf of the commission in any court of competent jurisdiction seeking an order to compel compliance with an order issued pursuant to subdivision d of this section. § 8-115 Mediation and conciliation. a. If in the judgment of the commission circumstances so warrant, it may at any time after the filing of a complaint endeavor to resolve the complaint by any method of dispute resolution prescribed by rule of the commission including, but not limited to, mediation and conciliation. b. The terms of any conciliation agreement may contain such provisions as may be agreed upon by the commission, the complaint and the respondent, including a provision for the entry in court of a consent decree embodying the terms of the conciliation agreement. c. The members of the commission and its staff shall not publicly disclose what transpired in the course of mediation and conciliation efforts. d. If a conciliation agreement is entered into, the commission shall embody such agreement in an order and serve a copy of such order upon all parties to the conciliation agreement. Violation of such an order may cause the imposition of civil penalties under section 8-124 of this chapter. Every conciliation agreement shall be made public unless the complainant and respondent agree otherwise and the commission determines that disclosure is not required to further the purposes of this chapter. § 8-116 Determination of probable cause. a. Except in connection with commission-initiated complaints which shall not require a determination of probable cause, where the commission determines that probable cause exists to believe that the respondent has engaged or is engaging in an unlawful discriminatory practice or an act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title, the commission shall issue a written notice to complainant and respondent so stating. A determination of probable cause is not a final order of the commission and shall not be administratively or judicially reviewable. b. If there is a determination of probable cause pursuant to subdivision a of this section in relation to a complaint alleging discrimination in housing accommodations, land or commercial space or an interest therein, or if a commission-initiated complaint relating to discrimination in housing accommodations, land or commercial space or an interest therein has been filed, and the property owner or the owner's duly authorized agent will not agree voluntarily to withhold from the market the subject housing accommodations, land or commercial space or an interest therein for a period of 10 days from the date of such request the commission may cause to be posted for a period of 10 days from the date of such request, in a conspicuous place on the land or on the door of such housing accommodations or commercial space, a notice stating that such accommodations, land or commercial space are the subject of a complaint before the commission and that prospective transferees will take such accommodations, land or commercial space at their peril. Any destruction, defacement, alteration or removal of such notice by the owner or the owner's agents or employees shall be a misdemeanor punishable on conviction thereof by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than one year or both. c. If a determination is made pursuant to subdivision a of this section that probable cause exists, or if a commission-initiated complaint has been filed, the commission shall refer the complaint to an administrative law judge and shall serve a notice upon the complainant, respondent and any necessary party that the complaint has been so referred. § 8-117 Rules of procedure. The commission shall adopt rules providing for hearing and pre-hearing procedure. These rules shall include rules providing that the commission, by its prosecutorial bureau, shall be a party to all complaints and that a complainant shall be a party if the complainant has intervened in the manner set forth in the rules of the commission. These rules shall also include rules governing discovery, motion practice and the issuance of subpoenas. Wherever necessary, the commission shall issue orders compelling discovery. In accordance with the commission's discovery rules, any party from whom discovery is sought may assert an objection to such discovery based upon a claim of privilege or other defense and the commission shall rule upon such objection. § 8-118 Noncompliance with discovery order or order relating to records. Whenever a party fails to comply with an order of the commission pursuant to section 8-117 of this chapter compelling discovery or an order pursuant to section 8-114 of this chapter relating to records the commission may, on its own motion or at the request of any part, and, after notice and opportunity for all parties to be heard in opposition or support, make such orders or take such action as may be just for the purpose of permitting the resolution of relevant issues or disposition of the complaint without unnecessary delay, including but not limited to: (a) An order that the matter concerning which the order compelling discovery or relating to records was issued be established adversely to the claim of the noncomplying party; (b) An order prohibiting the noncomplying party from introducing evidence or testimony, cross-examining witnesses or otherwise supporting or opposing designated claims or defenses; (c) An order striking out pleadings or parts thereof; (d) An order that the noncomplying party may not be heard to object to the introduction and use of secondary evidence to show what the withheld testimony, documents, other evidence or required records would have shown; and (e) Infer that the material or testimony is withheld or records not preserved, made, kept, produced or made available for inspection because such material, testimony or records would prove to be unfavorable to the noncomplying party and use such inference to establish facts in support of a final determination pursuant to section 8-120 of this chapter. § 8-119 Hearing. a. A hearing on the complaint shall be held before an administrative law judge designated by the commission. The place of any such hearing shall be the office of the commission or such other place as may be designated by the commission. Notice of the date, time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the complainant, respondent and any necessary party. b. The case in support of the complaint shall be presented before the commission by the commission's prosecutorial bureau. The complainant may present additional testimony and cross-examine witnesses, in person or by counsel, if the complainant shall have intervened pursuant to rules established by the commission. c. The administrative law judge may, in the administrative law judge's discretion, permit any person who has a substantial interest in the complaint to intervene as a party and may require the joinder of necessary parties. d. Evidence relating to endeavors at mediation or conciliation by, between or among the commission, the complainant and the respondent shall not be admissible. e. If the respondent has failed to answer the complaint within the time period prescribed in section 8-111 of this chapter, the administrative law judge may enter a default and the hearing shall proceed to determine the evidence in support of the complaint. Upon application, the administrative law judge may, for good cause shown, open a default in answering, upon equitable terms and conditions, including the taking of an oral answer. f. Except as otherwise provided in section 8-118 of this chapter, the commission by its prosecutorial bureau, a respondent who has filed an answer or whose default in answering has been set aside for good cause shown, a necessary party, and a complainant or other person who has intervened pursuant to the rules of the commission, may appear at such hearing in person or otherwise, with or without counsel, cross-examine witnesses, present testimony and offer evidence. g. The commission shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of the state of New York. The testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath and shall be transcribed. § 8-120 Decision and order. a. If, upon all the evidence at the hearing, and upon the findings of fact, conclusions of law and relief recommended by an administrative law judge, the commission shall find that a respondent has engaged in any unlawful discriminatory practice or any act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title, the commission shall state its findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue and cause to be served on the complainant, respondent, any necessary party and any complainant who has not intervened an order requiring such respondent to cease and desist from such unlawful discriminatory practice or acts of discriminatory harassment or violence. Such order shall require the respondent to take such affirmative action as, in the judgment of the commission, will effectuate the purposes of this chapter or chapter 6 of this title, as applicable, including, but not limited to: 1. Hiring, reinstatement or upgrading of employees; 2. The award of back pay and front pay; 3. Admission to membership in any respondent labor organization; 4. Admission to or participation in a program, apprentice training program, on-the-job training program or other occupational training or retraining program; 5. The extension of full, equal and unsegregated accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges; 6. Evaluating applications for membership in a club that is not distinctly private, without unlawful discrimination; 7. Selling, renting or leasing, or approving the sale, rental or lease of housing accommodations, land or commercial space or an interest therein, or the provision of credit with respect thereto, without unlawful discrimination; 8. Payment of compensatory damages to the person aggrieved by such practice or act; 9. Submission of reports with respect to the manner of compliance; and 10. Payment of the complainant's reasonable attorney's fees, expert fees and other costs. The commission may consider matter-specific factors when determining the complainant's attorney's fee award, including, but not limited to: (i) Novelty or difficulty of the issues presented; (ii) Skill and experience of the complainant's attorney; and (iii) The hourly rate charged by attorneys of similar skill and experience litigating similar cases in New York county. b. If, upon all the evidence at the hearing, and upon the findings of fact and conclusions of law recommended by the administrative law judge, the commission shall find that a respondent has not engaged in any such unlawful discriminatory practice or act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title, the commission shall state its findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue and cause to be served on the complainant, respondent, and any necessary party and on any complainant who has not intervened an order dismissing the complaint as to such respondent. § 8-121 Reopening of proceeding by commission. The commission may reopen any proceeding, or vacate or modify any order or determination of the commission, whenever justice so requires, in accordance with the rules of the commission. § 8-122 Injunction and temporary restraining order. At any time after the filing of a complaint alleging an unlawful discriminatory practice under this chapter or an act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title, if the commission has reason to believe that the respondent or other person acting in concert with respondent is doing or procuring to be done any act or acts, tending to render ineffectual relief that could be ordered by the commission after a hearing as provided by section 8-120, a special proceeding may be commenced in accordance with article 63 of the civil practice law and rules on behalf of the commission in the supreme court for an order to show cause why the respondent and such other persons who are believed to be acting in concert with respondent should not be enjoined from doing or procuring to be done such acts. The special proceeding may be commenced in any county within the city where the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice or act of discriminatory harassment or violence was committed, or where the commission maintains its principal office for the transaction of business, or where any respondent resides or maintains an office for the transaction of business, or where any person aggrieved by the unlawful discriminatory practice or act of discriminatory harassment or violence resides, or, if the complaint alleges an unlawful discriminatory practice under paragraphs (a), (b) or (c) of subdivision 5 of section 8-107, where the housing accommodation, land or commercial space specified in the complaint is located. The order to show cause may contain a temporary restraining order and shall be served in the manner provided therein. On the return date of the order to show cause, and after affording the commission, the person aggrieved and the respondent and any person alleged to be acting in concert with the respondent an opportunity to be heard, the court may grant appropriate injunctive relief upon such terms and conditions as the court deems proper. § 8-123 Judicial review. a. Any complainant, respondent or other person aggrieved by a final order of the commission issued pursuant to section 8-120 or section 8-126 of this chapter or an order of the chairperson issued pursuant to subdivision f of section 8-113 of this chapter affirming the dismissal of a complaint may obtain judicial review thereof in a proceeding as provided in this section. b. Such proceeding shall be brought in the supreme court of the state within any county within the city wherein the unlawful discriminatory practice or act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title which is the subject of the commission's order occurs or wherein any person required in the order to cease and desist from an unlawful discriminatory practice or act of discriminatory harassment or violence or to take other affirmative action resides or transacts business. c. Such proceeding shall be initiated by the filing of a petition in such court, together with a written transcript of the record upon the hearing, before the commission, and the issuance and service of a notice of motion returnable before such court. Thereupon the court shall have jurisdiction of the proceeding and of the questions determined therein, and shall have power to grant such relief as it deems just and proper, and to make and enter upon the pleadings, testimony, and proceedings set forth in such transcript an order annulling, confirming or modifying the order of the commission in whole or in part. No objection that has not been urged before the commission shall be considered by the court, unless the failure or neglect to urge such objection shall be excused because of extraordinary circumstances. d. Any part may move the court to remit the case to the commission in the interests of justice for the purpose of adducing additional specified and materials evidenced and seeking findings thereon, provided such party shows reasonable grounds for the failure to adduce such evidence before the commission. e. The findings of the commission as to the facts shall be conclusive if supported by substantial evidence on the record considered as a whole. f. All such proceedings shall be heard and determined by the court and by any appellate court as expeditiously as possible and with lawful precedence over other matters. The jurisdiction of the supreme court shall be exclusive and its judgment and order shall be final, subject to review by the appellate division of the supreme court and the court of appeals in the same manner and form and with the same effect as provided for appeals from a judgment in a special proceeding. g. The commission's copy of the testimony shall be available at all reasonable times to all parties for examination without cost and for the purposes of judicial review of the order of the commission. The appeal shall be heard on the record without requirement of printing. h. A proceeding under this section must be instituted within 30 days after the service of the order of the commission. § 8-124 Civil penalties for violating commission orders. Any person who fails to comply with an order issued by the commission pursuant to section 8-115 or section 8-120 shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than $50,000 and an additional civil penalty of not more than $100 per day for each day that the violation continues. § 8-125 Enforcement. a. Any action or proceeding that may be appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of any order issued by the commission pursuant to this chapter, including actions to secure permanent injunctions enjoining any acts or practices which constitute a violation of any such order, mandating compliance with the provisions of any such order, imposing penalties pursuant to section 8-124 of this chapter, or for such other relief as may be appropriate, may be initiated in any court of competent jurisdiction on behalf of the commission. In any such action or proceeding, application may be made for a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction, enforcing and restraining all persons from violating any provisions of any such order, or for such other relief as may be just and proper, until hearing and determination of such action or proceeding and the entry of final judgment or order thereon. The court to which such application is made may make any or all of the orders specified, as may be required in such application, with or without notice, and may make such other or further orders or directions as may be necessary to render the same effectual. b. In any action or proceeding brought pursuant to subdivision a of this section, no person shall be entitled to contest the terms of the order sought to be enforced unless that person has timely commenced a proceeding for review of the order pursuant to section 8-123 of this chapter. § 8-126 Civil penalties imposed by commission for unlawful discriminatory practices or acts of discriminatory harassment or violence. a. Except as otherwise provided in subdivision 13 of section 8-107, in addition to any of the remedies and penalties set forth in subdivision a of section 8-120, where the commission finds that a person has engaged in an unlawful discriminatory practice, the commission may, to vindicate the public interest, impose a civil penalty of not more than $125,000. Where the commission finds that an unlawful discriminatory practice was the result of the respondent's willful, wanton or malicious act or where the commission finds that an act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title has occurred, the commission may, to vindicate the public interest, impose a civil penalty of not more than $250,000. b. A respondent that is found liable for an unlawful discriminatory practice or an act of discriminatory harassment or violence, as set forth in chapter 6 of this title, may, in relation to the determination of the appropriate amount of civil penalties to be imposed pursuant to subdivision a of this section, plead and prove any relevant mitigating factor. c. In addition to any other penalties or sanctions which may be imposed pursuant to any other law, any person who knowingly makes a material false statement in any proceeding conducted, or document or record filed with the commission, or record required to be preserved or made and kept and subject to inspection by the commission pursuant to this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than $10,000. d. An action or proceeding may be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction on behalf of the commission for the recovery of the civil penalties provided for in this section. § 8-127 Disposition of civil penalties. a. Any civil penalties recovered pursuant to this chapter shall be paid into the general fund of the city. b. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, where an action or proceeding is commenced against a city agency for the enforcement of a final order issued by the commission pursuant to section 8-120 of the code after a finding that such agency has engaged in an unlawful discriminatory practice and in such action or proceeding civil penalties are sought for violation of such order, any civil penalties which are imposed by the court against such agency shall be budgeted in a separate account. Such account shall be used solely to support city agencies' anti-bias education programs, activities sponsored by city agencies that are designed to eradicate discrimination or to fund remedial programs that are necessary to address the city's liability for discriminatory acts or practices. Funds in such account shall not be used to support or benefit the commission. The disposition of such funds shall be under the direction of the mayor. § 8-128 Institution of actions or proceedings. Where any of the provisions of this chapter authorize an application to be made, or an action or proceeding to be commenced on behalf of the commission in a court, such application may be made or such action or proceeding may be instituted only by the corporation counsel, such attorneys employed by the commission as are designated by the corporation counsel or other persons designated by the corporation counsel. § 8-129 Criminal penalties. In addition to any other penalties or sanctions which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter or any other law, any person who shall willfully resist, prevent, impede or interfere with the commission or any of its members or representatives in the performance of any duty under this chapter, or shall willfully violate an order of the commission issued pursuant to section 8-115 or section 8-120, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punishable by imprisonment for not more than one year, or by a fine of not more than $10,000, or by both; but the procedure for the review of the order shall not be deemed to be such willful conduct. § 8-130 Construction. a. The provisions of this title shall be construed liberally for the accomplishment of the uniquely broad and remedial purposes thereof, regardless of whether federal or New York state civil and human rights laws, including those laws with provisions worded comparably to provisions of this title, have been so construed. b. Exceptions to and exemptions from the provisions of this title shall be construed narrowly in order to maximize deterrence of discriminatory conduct. c. Cases that have correctly understood and analyzed the liberal construction requirement of subdivision a of this section and that have developed legal doctrines accordingly that reflect the broad and remedial purposes of this title include Albunio v. City of New York, 16 N.Y.3d 472 (2011), Bennett v. Health Management Systems, Inc., 92 A.D.3d 29 (1st Dep't 2011), and the majority opinion in Williams v. New York City Housing Authority, 61 A.D.3d 62 (1st Dep't 2009). § 8-131 Applicability. The provisions of this chapter which make acts of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title subject to the jurisdiction of the commission shall not apply to acts committed by members of the police department in the course of performing their official duties as police officers whether the police officer is on or off duty. § 8-132 Sexual harassment information. a. The commission shall post conspicuously on the commission's website online resources about sexual harassment, including but not limited to: 1. Information that sets forth in simple and understandable terms: (a) An explanation that sexual harassment is a form of unlawful discrimination under local law; (b) Specific descriptions and examples of activities which may be sexual harassment; (c) A description of the commission's complaint process, and how to contact the commission; (d) A list of alternate and additional government agencies for filing complaints about sexual harassment, and the websites for such agencies, to the extent available; (e) An explanation that retaliation, including but not limited to retaliation for complaints concerning allegations of sexual harassment, is prohibited by subdivision 7 of section 8-107, and examples of activities which may be retaliation for such complaints; and (f) Bystander intervention education and the importance of taking action to prevent workplace sexual harassment. 2. An interactive tool describing each step of the complaint process available through the commission, from when a complaint is filed to when a determination is made on such complaint. § 8-133 Education and outreach regarding single-occupant toilet room requirements. The commission on human rights, in conjunction with the department of buildings, shall conduct outreach to the public at large regarding single- occupant toilet room requirements, which shall, at a minimum, include educational materials to inform transgender and gender non-conforming individuals of a building owner's required compliance with sections 403.2.1 and 403.4 of the New York city plumbing code and the violations and penalties that result from non-compliance with such sections. Such materials shall be available in the designated citywide languages as defined in section 23-1101 and shall include a statement that any non-compliance with such sections may be reported to 311 and shall be posted on the commission's website. § 8-134 Anti-discrimination poster. a. The commission shall create an anti-discrimination rights and responsibilities poster that addresses the forms of discrimination prohibited by the city human rights law, including age discrimination, and which explains how to contact the commission. The commission shall also include as part of its regular outreach and education efforts informational resources on age discrimination. Such poster and educational resources shall be made available on the commission's website. b. Every agency shall conspicuously display the poster created by the commission pursuant to this section in employee breakrooms or other common areas where employees gather. Chapter 2: Certain Unlawful Real Estate Practices § 8-201 Declaration of policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city of New York and the purpose of this chapter to promote fair dealing in real estate transactions, to maintain community stability and security, and to foster racial and social harmony. § 8-202 Definitions. As used in this chapter: 1. Chairperson means the chairperson of the New York city commission on human rights. 2. Commission means the New York city commission on human rights. 3. Dwelling or real property means one, two, three or four family residences, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such residence. 4. Legal notice means publication daily for one week in a newspaper of general circulation within the city of New York and written notice to all real estate brokers in the area. 5. Real estate broker means a real estate broker as defined in article twelve-A of the real property law of the state of New York. 6. Real estate dealer means any firm, partnership, association, corporation or person which or who has within the preceding twelve months, sold, traded or exchanged two or more dwellings other than, in the case of a person, such person's own residence. 7. Real estate office means an office or other place of business which is primarily engaged in the business of selling, buying, leasing, or renting real property; listing real property for sale, purchase, lease or rental; or providing brokerage services in connection with such selling, buying, leasing, renting, or listing. 8. Solicitation means requesting, inviting, or inducing by any means, including, but not limited to: (a) going in or upon the property of the person to be solicited, except when invited by such person; (b) communicating with the person to be solicited by mail, telephone, telegraph or messenger service, except when requested by such person; (c) canvassing in streets or other public places; (d) distributing handbills, circulars, cards or other advertising matter; (e) using loudspeakers, soundtrucks, or other voice-amplifying equipment; (f) displaying signs, posters, billboards, or other advertising devices other than signs placed upon a real estate office for the purpose of identifying the occupants and services provided therein, provided, however, that the term solicitation shall not include advertising in newspapers of general circulation, magazines, radio, television, or telephone directories. 9. Block, neighborhood or area means any forty square blocks within the city of New York. § 8-203 Unlawful real estate practices. 1. It shall be unlawful for any real estate broker or dealer or any agent or employee of a real estate broker or dealer, except in honest reply to an unprompted question by a prospective buyer or seller: (a) to represent, for the purpose of inducing or discouraging the purchase, sale, or rental, or the listing for purchase, sale, or rental, of any real property, that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the racial or religious composition of any block, neighborhood, or area. (b) to represent, implicitly or explicitly, for the purpose of inducing or discouraging the purchase, sale, or rental or the listing for purchase, sale, or rental of any real property, that the presence of persons of any particular race, religion or ethnic background in an area will or may result in: (1) a lowering of property values in the area; (2) change in the racial, religious or ethnic composition of the area; (3) an increase in criminal or anti-social behavior in the area; or (4) a change in the racial, religious or ethnic composition of schools or other public facilities or services in the area. 2. It shall be unlawful for any real estate broker or dealer or any agent or employee of a real estate broker or dealer: (a) to make any misrepresentation in connection with the purchase, sale, or rental of any real property, that there will or may be physical deterioration of dwellings in any block, neighborhood or area. (b) to refer to race, color, religion or ethnic background in any advertisement offering or seeking real property for purchase, sale or rental. 3. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation, to knowingly aid, abet, or coerce the commission of any act made unlawful by subdivisions one and two of this section. § 8-204 Non-solicitation areas. 1. The commission may designate an area as a non-solicitation area for a period of up to one year upon making written findings based on substantial evidence introduced at a public hearing that: (a) practices made unlawful by section 8-203 of this chapter, the inducement or encouragement by brokers or dealers of the use of fraudulent mortgage applications for the purchase of dwellings, or the direction based on race, creed, color or national origin by brokers or dealers of prospective purchasers or applicants to dwellings, or an unusually great incidence of solicitation are consistently occurring within the area, and that (b) such practices are causing, or are likely to cause, residents within the area to believe that: (1) property values in the area are declining, or about to decline rapidly; or (2) the area is experiencing, or is about to experience: (i) a declining level of maintenance of its housing stock; or (ii) an increase in criminal behavior; or (iii) a change in the racial, religious or ethnic composition of the schools in the area; or (3) the area is experiencing, or is about to experience, a material change in its racial, religious or ethnic composition; and (c) therefore, the temporary prohibition in the area of the real estate activities described in section 8-205 of this chapter is necessary to prevent a material change in the area's racial, religious or ethnic composition. 2. The commission may extend one or more times the designation of a non- solicitation area made pursuant to subdivision one of this section for a period of up to one year upon making written findings, based on substantial evidence introduced at a public hearing, that such extension is necessary to achieve the designation's purpose, as described in paragraph (c) of subdivision one of this section, provided, however, that no extension may be granted which, together with the original designation and all previous extensions, will maintain a non- solicitation area for a continuous period greater than two years. The public hearing on any extension shall be held not more than thirty days before the day on which the designation or earlier extension is scheduled to expire. 3. (a) The commission shall promptly announce by legal notice each designation made pursuant to subdivision one of this section and each extension made pursuant to subdivision two of this section, describing the area to which it applies by references to named streets and landmarks. Any designation shall take effect upon the completion of the publication required for legal notice. Any extension shall take effect at the time at which the designation or earlier extension would otherwise expire. (b) The commission shall maintain, and make available to all interested persons, a current listing of designated non-solicitation areas. 4. The commission may, at any time, terminate the designation of a non- solicitation area made pursuant to subdivision one of this section or the extension of a designation made pursuant to subdivision two of this section upon making findings, based on substantial evidence introduced at a public hearing, that the continuation of the designation or its extension is no longer necessary to achieve the designation's purpose, as described in this section. § 8-205 Activities prohibited with respect to non-solicitation areas. It shall be unlawful for any real estate broker or dealer or any agent or employee of a real estate broker or dealer to solicit, directly or indirectly, the sale, purchase, or rental of any dwelling located within a non-solicitation area. § 8-206 Hearings; rules; enforcement. 1. The commission may conduct investigations, studies, and hearings concerning practices and activities governed by this chapter. In conducting hearings, the commission shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, to compel their attendance, to administer oaths, to examine witnesses under oath, and to require the production of documents. A written record shall be made of every such hearing. 2. The commission shall have the authority from time to time to make, amend, and rescind such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 3. The chairperson or his or her designated representative shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this chapter by signing criminal complaints against any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation for violation of this chapter. 4. The chairperson shall report to the secretary of state of New York all violations of this chapter by real estate brokers and salespersons. § 8-207 Violations. Any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation convicted of violating this chapter shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor. § 8-208 Civil remedies. 1. (a) Any owner of real property who is induced to sell his or her property through or to a real estate broker or real estate dealer by acts committed by such broker or dealer in violation of section 8-203 or section 8-205 of this chapter may institute a civil action against such broker or dealer. (b) If, in an action instituted pursuant to this subdivision, judgment is rendered in favor of plaintiff, such plaintiff shall be awarded as damages (i) the amount of any gains, whether in the form of profits, commission, or otherwise, realized by defendant as the result of the first subsequent arm's length sale, exchange, or transfer of the property, or, if defendant acted as a broker, the amount of any commissions received by defendant through the sale, exchange, or transfer of plaintiff's property, such gains in all cases to be calculated without regard to any expenses incurred by the defendant, and may in addition be awarded reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs; or (ii) if the defendant has not realized any gains as defined in this subdivision, an amount equal to the difference between the price for which plaintiff sold his or her property and the fair market value at the time of the sale, or the fair market value of the property at the time the action is commenced, whichever difference is greater, and may in addition be awarded reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs. 2. (a) Any buyer, through or from a real estate broker or real estate dealer, of real property the last owner of which, excluding such broker or dealer, was induced to sell, exchange or transfer his or her property by acts committed by such broker or dealer in violation of section 8-203 or section 8-205 of this chapter may institute a civil action against such broker or dealer. (b) If, in an action instituted pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subdivision, judgment is rendered in favor of plaintiff, the plaintiff shall be awarded as damages the amount of any gains, whether in the form of profits, commission, or otherwise, realized by defendant as the result of such plaintiff's purchase of the property, such gains in all cases to be calculated without regard to any expenses incurred by the defendant, and may in addition be awarded reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs. 3. With respect to the sale, exchange or transfer of any property, the liability of a broker or dealer created by subdivision two of this section shall be independent of and additional to the liability of such broker or dealer created by subdivision one of this section. Chapter 3: Civil Rights Demonstration Protection § 8-301 Legislative declaration. It is hereby found that the letter and spirit of the constitution of the United States are being violated in some jurisdictions under color of law with the result that persons from this city and state, as well as from other states, are being subjected to discriminatory treatment in the exercise of their constitutional rights because of race or because they seek the removal of unconstitutional barriers to equal rights. Such persons, sometimes referred to as freedom riders and sit-ins, intent upon peaceful resistance to discrimination, segregation and the achievement of the constitutional rights of all persons in all jurisdictions of the United States, have suffered the stigma of criminal proceedings. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to remove or to neutralize by affording to such residents appropriate relief to the fullest extent possible, the effect upon residents of this city of such criminal proceedings, resulting from the attempted use of public transportation facilities and other places of public accommodation. § 8-302 Removal of disability or disqualification. Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, no person shall be denied any license, right, benefit or privilege extended by this code, or suffer any other disability or disqualification thereunder, or be denied the right of employment by the city, solely because of any arrest, apprehension, detention, indictment or other accusation, arraignment, trial, conviction or any other aspect of conviction or adjudication of a crime had under the jurisdiction of the courts of any state or of the United States, which is founded on an act or acts arising out of any peaceful demonstration or other peaceful activity, the object of which is to resist discriminatory treatment in any place of public accommodation as defined by section 40 of the civil rights law, or to achieve equal rights for all persons regardless of race, creed, color or national origin. Chapter 4: Civil Action to Eliminate Unlawful Discriminatory Practices § 8-401 Legislative declaration. The council finds that certain forms of unlawful discrimination are systemic in nature rooted in the operating conditions or policies of a business or industry. The council finds that the existence of systemic discrimination poses a substantial threat to, and inflicts significant injury upon, the city that is economic, social and moral in character, and is distinct from the injury sustained by individuals as an incident of such discrimination. The council finds that the potential for systemic discrimination exists in all areas of public life and that employment, housing and public accommodations are among the areas in which the economic effects of systemic discrimination are exemplified. The existence of systemic discrimination impedes the optimal efficiency of the labor market by, among other things, causing decisions to employ, promote or discharge persons to be based upon reasons other than qualifications and competence. Such discrimination impedes the optimal efficiency of the housing market and retards private investments in certain neighborhoods by causing decisions to lease or sell housing accommodations to be based upon discriminatory factors and not upon ability and willingness to lease or purchase property. The council finds that the reduction in the efficiency of the labor, housing and commercial markets has a detrimental effect on the city's economy, thereby reducing revenues and increasing costs to the city. The council finds that such economic injury to the city severely diminishes its capacity to meet the needs of those persons living and working in, and visiting, the city. The council finds further that the social and moral consequences of systemic discrimination are similarly injurious to the city in that systemic discrimination polarizes the city's communities, demoralizes its inhabitants and creates disrespect for the law, thereby frustrating the city's efforts to foster mutual respect and tolerance among its inhabitants and to promote a safe and secure environment. The council finds that the potential consequences to the city of this form of discrimination requires that the corporation counsel be expressly given the authority to institute a civil action to enforce the city's human rights law so as to supplement administrative means to prevent or remedy injury to the city. § 8-402 Civil action to eliminate unlawful discriminatory practices. a. Whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that a person or group of persons is engaged in a pattern or practice that results in the denial to any person of the full enjoyment of any right secured by chapter 1 of this title, a civil action on behalf of the commission or the city may be commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction, by filing a complaint setting forth facts pertaining to such pattern or practice and requesting such relief as may be deemed necessary to insure the full enjoyment of the rights described in such chapter, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief, damages, including punitive damages, and such other types of relief as are specified in subdivision a of section 8-120. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit (i) an aggrieved person from filing a complaint pursuant to section 8-109 or from commencing a civil action pursuant to chapter 5 of this title based upon the same facts pertaining to such a pattern or practice as are alleged in the civil action, or (ii) the commission from filing a commission-initiated complaint pursuant to section 8-109 alleging a pattern or practice of discrimination, provided that a civil action pursuant to this section shall not have previously been commenced. b. A civil action commenced under this section must be commenced within three years after the alleged discriminatory practice occurred. c. Such action may be instituted only by the corporation counsel, such attorneys employed by the city commission on human rights as are designated by the corporation counsel or other persons designated by the corporation counsel. § 8-403 Investigation. The corporation counsel may initiate any investigation to ascertain such facts as may be necessary for the commencement of a civil action pursuant to section 8-402, and in connection therewith shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, to administer oaths and to examine such persons as are deemed necessary. § 8-404 Civil penalty. In any civil action commenced pursuant to section 8-402, the trier of fact may, to vindicate the public interest, impose upon any person who is found to have engaged in a pattern or practice that results in the denial to any person of the full enjoyment of any right secured by chapter 1 of this title a civil penalty of not more than $250,000. In relation to determining the appropriate amount of civil penalties to be imposed pursuant to this section a liable party may plead and prove any relevant mitigating factor. Any civil penalties so recovered pursuant to this chapter shall be paid into the general fund of the city. Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude the city from recovering damages, including punitive damages, and other relief pursuant to section 8-402 in addition to civil penalties. Chapter 5: Civil Action by Persons Aggrieved by Unlawful Discriminatory Practices § 8-502 Civil action by persons aggrieved by unlawful discriminatory practices. a. Except as otherwise provided by law, any person claiming to be a person aggrieved by an unlawful discriminatory practice as defined in chapter 1 of this title or by an act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title shall have a cause of action in any court of competent jurisdiction for damages, including punitive damages, and for injunctive relief and such other remedies as may be appropriate, unless such person has filed a complaint with the city commission on human rights or with the state division of human rights with respect to such alleged unlawful discriminatory practice or act of discriminatory harassment or violence. For purposes of this subdivision, the filing of a complaint with a federal agency pursuant to applicable federal law prohibiting discrimination which is subsequently referred to the city commission on human rights or to the state division of human rights pursuant to such law shall not be deemed to constitute the filing of a complaint under this subdivision. b. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of subdivision a of this section, where a complaint filed with the city commission on human rights or the state division on human rights is dismissed by the city commission on human rights pursuant to subdivisions a, b or c of section 8-113, or by the state division of human rights pursuant to subdivision 9 of section 297 of the executive law either for administrative convenience or on the grounds that such person's election of an administrative remedy is annulled, an aggrieved person shall maintain all rights to commence a civil action pursuant to this chapter as if no such complaint had been filed. c. The city commission on human rights and the corporation counsel shall each designate a representative authorized to receive copies of complaints in actions commenced in whole or in part pursuant to subdivision a of this section. Within 10 days after having commenced a civil action pursuant to subdivision a of this section, the plaintiff shall serve a copy of the complaint upon such authorized representatives. d. A civil action commenced under this section must be commenced within three years after the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice or act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title occurred. Upon the filing of a complaint with the city commission on human rights or the state division of human rights and during the pendency of such complaint and any court proceeding for review of the dismissal of such complaint, such three-year limitations period shall be tolled. d-1. Any provision of an agreement involving an employer, employment agency, or agent thereof pertaining to terms of employment that purports to shorten the periods in which a civil action may be commenced pursuant to subdivision d is unenforceable and void as against public policy. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to affect the enforceability of any provision of any agreement other than a provision limiting the period in which a civil action may be commenced. e. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this section, where a complaint filed with the city commission on human rights or state division of human rights is dismissed for administrative convenience and such dismissal is due to the complainant's malfeasance, misfeasance or recalcitrance, the three year limitation period on commencing a civil action pursuant to this section shall not be tolled. Unwillingness to accept a reasonable proposed conciliation agreement shall not be considered malfeasance, misfeasance or recalcitrance. f. The provisions of this section which provide a cause of action to persons claiming to be persons aggrieved by an act of discriminatory harassment or violence as set forth in chapter 6 of this title shall not apply to acts committed by members of the police department in the course of performing their official duties as police officers whether the police officer is on or off duty. This subdivision shall in no way affect rights or causes of action created by section 14-151. g. In any civil action commenced pursuant to this section, the court, in its discretion, may award the prevailing party reasonable attorney's fees, expert fees and other costs. For the purposes of this subdivision, the term prevailing includes a plaintiff whose commencement of litigation has acted as a catalyst to effect policy change on the part of the defendant, regardless of whether that change has been implemented voluntarily, as a result of a settlement or as a result of a judgment in such plaintiff's favor. The court shall apply the hourly rate charged by attorneys of similar skill and experience litigating similar cases in New York county when it chooses to factor the hourly rate into the attorney's fee award. h. 1. The term person aggrieved includes a person whose right created, granted or protected by chapters 1 or 6 of this title is violated by a covered entity directly or through conduct of the covered entity to which the person's agent or employee is subjected while the agent or employee was acting, or as a result of the agent or employee having acted, within the scope of the agency or employment relationship. For purposes of this subdivision, an agent or employee's protected status is imputed to that person's principal or employer when the agent or employee acts within the scope of the agency or employment relationship. It is irrelevant whether or not the covered entity knows of the agency or employment relationship. 2. A person is aggrieved even if that person's only injury is the deprivation of a right granted or protected by chapters 1 or 6 of this title. 3. This subdivision does not limit or exclude any other basis for a cause of action. Chapter 6: Discriminatory Harassment or Violence § 8-602 Civil action to enjoin discriminatory harassment or violence; equitable remedies. a. Whenever a person interferes by threats, intimidation or coercion or attempts to interfere by threats, intimidation or coercion with the exercise or enjoyment by any person of rights secured by the constitution or laws of the United States, the constitution or laws of this state, or local law of the city and such interference or attempted interference is motivated in whole or in part by the victim's actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, gender, sexual and reproductive health decisions, sexual orientation, age, whether children are, may or would be residing with such victim, marital status, partnership status, disability, or immigration or citizenship status as defined in chapter 1 of this title, the corporation counsel, at the request of the city commission on human rights or on the corporation counsel's own initiative, may bring a civil action on behalf of the city for injunctive and other appropriate equitable relief in order to protect the peaceable exercise or enjoyment of the rights secured. b. An action pursuant to subdivision a of this section may be brought in any court of competent jurisdiction. c. Violation of an order issued pursuant to subdivision a of this section may be punished by a proceeding for contempt brought pursuant to article 19 of the judiciary law and, in addition to any relief thereunder, a civil penalty may be imposed not exceeding $10,000 for each day that the violation continues. § 8-603 Discriminatory harassment; civil penalties. a. No person shall by force or threat of force, knowingly injure, intimidate or interfere with, oppress, or threaten any other person in the free exercise or enjoyment of any right or privilege secured to such other person by the constitution or laws of this state or by the constitution or laws of the United States or by local law of the city when such injury, intimidation, interference, oppression or threat is motivated in whole or in part by the victim's actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, gender, sexual and reproductive health decisions, sexual orientation, age, marital status, partnership status, disability or immigration or citizenship status, as defined in chapter 1 of this title. b. No person shall knowingly deface, damage or destroy the real or personal property of any person for the purpose of intimidating or interfering with the free exercise or enjoyment of any right or privilege secured to the other person by the constitution or laws of this state or by the constitution or laws of the United States or by local law of the city when such defacement, damage or destruction of real or personal property is motivated in whole or in part by the victim's actual or perceived race, creed, color, national origin, gender, sexual and reproductive health decisions, sexual orientation, age, marital status, partnership status, or whether children are, may be, or would be residing with such victim, disability or immigration or citizenship status, as defined in chapter 1 of this title. c. Any person who violates subdivision a or b of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than $100,000 for each violation, which may be recovered by the corporation counsel in an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction. § 8-604 Disposition of civil penalties. Any civil penalties recovered by the corporation counsel pursuant to this chapter shall be paid into the general fund of the city. Chapter 7: Discriminatory Boycotts § 8-701 Legislative declaration. Boycotts or blacklists that are based on a person's race, color, creed, age, national origin, alienage or citizenship status, marital status, partnership status, gender, sexual orientation, or disability pose a menace to the city's foundation and institutions. In contrast to protests that are in reaction to an unlawful discriminatory practice, connected with a labor dispute or associated with other speech or activities that are protected by the first amendment discriminatory boycotts cause havoc, divide the citizenry and do not serve a legitimate purpose. The council declares that discriminatory boycotts are a dangerously insidious form of prejudice and hereby establishes a procedure for expeditiously investigating allegations of this type of prejudice, assuring that the council and mayor are duly alerted to the existence of such activity and combating discriminatory boycotts or blacklists. § 8-702 Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Commission. The term commission means the city commission on human rights. Council. The term council means the council of the city of New York. Discriminatory boycott or blacklist. The term discriminatory boycott or blacklist means any act that is an unlawful discriminatory practice under subdivision 18 of section 8-107. § 8-703 Investigative reporting requirements. The following requirements shall apply to all complaints alleging that a discriminatory boycott or blacklist is occurring: (1) The commission shall begin an investigation within 24 hours of the filing of a complaint which alleges that a discriminatory boycott or blacklist is occurring. (2) Within three days after initiating such an investigation, the commission shall file a written report with the mayor. The report shall state: (a) The allegations contained in the complaint; (b) Whether the commission has reason to believe a discriminatory boycott or blacklist is taking place; and (c) Steps the commission has taken to resolve the dispute. (3) If it is stated within the report described in subdivision 2 of this section that the commission has reason to believe that a discriminatory boycott or blacklist has taken place, within 30 days after filing such report, the commission shall file a second report with the mayor and the council. This second report shall contain: (a) A brief description of the allegations contained in the complaint; (b) A determination of whether probable cause exists to believe a discriminatory boycott or blacklist is taking place; (c) A recitation of the facts that form the basis of the commission's determination of probable cause; and (d) If the boycott or blacklist is continuing at the date of the report, a description of all actions the commission or other city agency has taken or will undertake to resolve the dispute. (4) If a finding of probable cause is not contained in the report required by subdivision 3 of this section and the boycott or blacklist continues for more than 20 days subsequent to the report's release, then, upon demand of the mayor or council, the commission shall update such report. Report updates shall detail: (a) Whether or not the commission presently has probable cause to believe a discriminatory boycott or blacklist is taking place; and (b) All new activity the commission or other city agency has taken or will undertake to resolve the dispute. (5) If the commission determines that the disclosure of any information in a report required by this section may interfere with or compromise a pending investigation or efforts to resolve the dispute by mediation or conciliation, it shall file the report without such information and state in the report the reasons for omitting such information. Chapter 8: The Right of Security Against Unreasonable Search and Seizure and Against Excessive Force Regardless of Whether Such Force Is Used in Connection with a Search or Seizure. § 8-801 Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Covered individual. The term covered individual means (i) an employee of the police department or (ii) a person who is appointed by the police commissioner as a special patrolman pursuant to subdivision c or e of section 14-106. Person aggrieved. The term person aggrieved means a natural person who is allegedly subjected to, or allegedly caused to be subjected to, the deprivation of a right created, granted or protected by section 8-802 by a covered individual even if the only injury allegedly suffered by such natural person is the deprivation of such right. Prevailing plaintiff. The term prevailing plaintiff has the meaning ascribed to such term in subdivision g of section 8-502. State. The term state means the state of New York. § 8-802 Right of security against unreasonable search and seizure and against excessive force regardless of whether such force is used in connection with a search or seizure. The right of natural persons to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures, and to be secure against the use of excessive force regardless of whether such force is used in connection with a search or seizure, shall not be violated; and no warrants shall be issued but upon probable cause supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized. § 8-803 Civil action for deprivation of rights. a. A covered individual who, under color of any law, ordinance, rule, regulation, custom or usage, subjects or causes to be subjected, including through failure to intervene, any other natural person to the deprivation of any right that is created, granted or protected by section 8-802 is liable to the person aggrieved for legal or equitable relief or any other appropriate relief. b. The employer of a covered individual who, under color of any law, ordinance, rule, regulation, custom or usage, subjects or causes to be subjected, including through failure to intervene, any other natural person to the deprivation of any right that is created, granted or protected by section 8-802 is liable, based upon the conduct of such covered individual, to the person aggrieved for legal or equitable relief or any other appropriate relief. c. A person aggrieved may make a claim pursuant to subdivision a of this section in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction by filing a complaint setting forth facts pertaining to the deprivation of any right created, granted or protected by section 8-802 and requesting such relief as such person aggrieved considers necessary to insure the full enjoyment of such right. d. This section does not limit or abrogate any claim or cause of action a person aggrieved has under common law or pursuant to any other law or rule. Despite the availability of an alternative remedy under common law or pursuant to any other law or rule, the person aggrieved has and maintains a private right of action pursuant to this section. Exhaustion of any administrative remedies is not required for a person aggrieved to commence a civil action pursuant to this section. The remedies provided by this chapter are in addition to any other remedies that may be provided for under common law or pursuant to any other law or rule. § 8-804 Immunity not a defense. It is not a defense to liability pursuant to this chapter that a covered individual has qualified immunity or any other substantially equivalent immunity. § 8-805 Relief. a. In any civil action involving a claim made pursuant to section 8-803 against a covered individual or an employer thereof, a court shall, in addition to awarding any other relief, including injunctive or other equitable relief, as such court determines to be appropriate: 1. Award to a prevailing plaintiff on such claim (i) compensatory damages and, in such court's discretion, punitive damages or (ii) at the election of such plaintiff, damages of $1,000; 2. Award to such plaintiff reasonable attorney's fees and court costs; and 3. Issue an order restraining such covered individual from engaging in further conduct in violation of such section. b. The court shall apply the hourly rate charged by attorneys of similar skill and experience litigating similar cases when it chooses to factor the hourly rate into an attorney's fee award. § 8-806 Statute of limitations. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in section 50-k of the general municipal law or any other provision of law, a person aggrieved must make a claim pursuant to section 8-803 in a civil action within 3 years after the alleged deprivation of a right created, granted or protected by section 8-802 occurred. § 8-807 Construction. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and notwithstanding section 8-130, (i) the right against unreasonable search and seizure, including excessive force used in connection with a search or seizure, created, granted or protected by section 8-802 shall be construed in the same manner as the right against unreasonable search and seizure, including excessive force used in connection with a search or seizure, created, granted or protected by the fourth amendment of the federal constitution, section 12 of article I of the state constitution and section 8 of the civil rights law and (ii) the right against excessive force, other than excessive force used in connection with a search or seizure, created, granted or protected by section 8-802 shall be construed in the same manner as the right against excessive force, other than excessive force used in connection with a search or seizure, created, granted or protected by the fourteenth amendment of the federal constitution and section 6 of article I of the state constitution. Chapter 9: Actions by Victims of Gender-Motivated Violence. § 8-901 This chapter has been renumbered as 10-1101. Chapter 10: Equal Access to Human Services. § 8-1001 This chapter has been renumbered as 21-189 et seq.

Title 9: Criminal Justice Chapter 1: Department of Correction § 9-101 City correctional institutions. The commissioner of correction may designate any institution or part thereof under the jurisdiction of the commissioner for the safekeeping of persons committed to the department of correction. The commissioner may also designate any institution or part thereof under his or her jurisdiction for the safekeeping of female prisoners only. Officers charged with the transportation of persons committed to the department of correction shall deliver them to the institution or part thereof as may be directed by the commissioner. § 9-102 Buildings for common jails. The board of estimate by resolution may designate from time to time any building or buildings within the city to be the common jails of such city or of any of the counties therein. The building or buildings so designated shall be such common jails until changed by a like resolution of such board. § 9-103 Segregation of prisoners on Hart's Island. § 9-104 Transfer of incarcerated individuals by commissioner of correction. The commissioner of correction shall have power to transfer prisoners from any prison or correctional institution under his or her control to any other prison or correctional institution under the jurisdiction of the department. § 9-105 Commitment of witnesses in criminal proceedings. The commissioner of correction shall have authority concerning the care and custody of witnesses in criminal proceedings committed to the institutions under the commissioner's charge. Upon the recommendation of the district attorney, the commissioner of correction may transfer such witnesses from one institution under the commissioner's charge to another such institution. § 9-106 Legislative intent; narcotics treatment program. The charter empowers the council as the legislative body of the city of New York to pass laws for the order, protection and government of persons and property; for the preservation of the public health, comfort, peace and prosperity of the city and its inhabitants. One of the major problems facing New York today, and one which involves almost every one of the above enumerated powers is the narcotics problem. There has been no abatement in the seriously burgeoning scourge of narcotic addiction in New York city despite the nineteen hundred sixty-two White House conference on narcotics and drug abuses and the nineteen hundred sixty-five Gracie Mansion conference on narcotics addiction, the enactment and administration of article nine of the mental hygiene law, and the various legislative expressions of interest and concern on federal, state and city levels. It has also been adequately demonstrated that the incarceration of an addict after an arrest and trial without a specific modality of medical and/or social therapy, even with the involvement of multi- million dollar expense and capital funding, offers no solution to the problem and even the establishment of many so-called half-way houses dealing with after-care and the social needs of the drug addict have failed. Sufficient studies have been made to determine that a program of treatment which blocks out the craving, narcotic hunger and euphoria associated with heroin is successful and by giving maintenance dosages of methadone hydrochloride as a complete substitute for heroin, we can start to drive down the rate of narcotics addiction in our city. Between December nineteen hundred sixty-seven and April nineteen hundred sixty-eight, the city prison at Rikers Island, was used for a demonstration project for the use of methadone hydrochloride to combat heroin addiction. This voluntary program involved twelve hard core, intractable, recidivist addicts, with multiple arrest and long conviction records and it achieved remarkable results. One of the conclusions of the final report of this demonstration project reveals that a large number of the four thousand to five thousand addict prisoners would be willing to accept methadone maintenance treatment if it were available. The applicants for interviews in the prison were so numerous that all could not be interviewed. Letters from prisoners still continue to arrive requesting treatment. Despite the demonstrated success of the program, it is being abandoned. The final report reflects the reason for not continuing and expanding the program to realistic dimensions; that reason is the unavailability of funds. This conclusion is difficult to comprehend in view of the multi-million dollar funding of other programs, which have neither revealed any new solutions nor have they demonstrated any degree of achievement. It is not anticipated that this legislation will solve the problem. Hopefully, it will reverse the ever mounting spiral of heroin addiction. § 9-107 Narcotics treatment program. a. Correctional health services, or any entity with which the department of correction or the department of health and mental hygiene contracts to provide healthcare for incarcerated individuals, shall establish a program for the treatment of substance abuse through the use of medication assisted treatment, including the administration of methadone, buprenorphine, and naltrexone. The program shall be available on a voluntary basis only to such incarcerated individuals as apply, subject to a medical evaluation, before acceptance, of their need for such treatment. b. The commissioner of correction shall ensure that any housing unit in which transgender, intersex, non-binary, or gender non-conforming individuals are housed has access to the same substance abuse treatment as other incarcerated individuals. Such treatment shall only be given voluntarily and based on the exercise of professional medical judgment of a medical provider following consultation between such medical provider and the incarcerated person. § 9-108 Sick call and clinic production. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Clinic production. The term clinic production means the department's process by which an incarcerated individual is escorted for a medical appointment. Correctional health services. The term correctional health services means any health care entity designated by the city of New York as the agency or agencies responsible for health services for incarcerated individuals in the care and custody of the department. When the responsibility is contractually shared with an outside provider this term shall also apply. Health care professional. The term health care professional means a person who meets qualifications stipulated by their profession and who possesses all credentials and licenses required by New York state law. Medical appointment. The term medical appointment means any patient encounter requested by correctional health services. Non-production. The term non-production means an instance where an incarcerated individual is not escorted for a medical appointment requested by correctional health services. Production refusal. The term production refusal means a refusal by an incarcerated individual to allow the department to produce such incarcerated individual to clinic for a medical appointment. Nothing in this definition, or in this section, is intended to contradict rules governing treatment set forth in chapter 3 of title 40 of the rules of the city of New York. Sick call. The term sick call means the department's process by which an incarcerated individual requests to be seen by a health care professional for the purpose of assessing or treating such incarcerated individual's non- emergency medical complaint. Walk-out. The term walk-out means an instance when an incarcerated individual leaves clinic without being seen by a health care professional for a medical appointment. b. The department shall retain all documents containing data relating to sick call and clinical production, including handwritten sign-up sheets, for at least three years from the time an incarcerated individual is released from custody of the department, and provide such documents to the board of correction upon request. c. The department shall provide all housing units with access to sick call on weekdays, excluding holidays, and subject to the exclusions set forth in chapter 3 of title 40 of the rules of the city of New York, or exclusions obtained through a variance pursuant to section 3-13 of such rules. d. Where individuals are not produced for medical appointments, department personnel shall record the facility, along with the reason for non-production, including but not limited to: court, visits, production refusal, walkout, programming, barbershop, recreation, and other. For the category, other, department personnel shall provide a brief narrative. If the reason for non-production is a refusal or walkout, the department will also record the reason for refusal or walkout, if given. The department shall make such records legible and available to the board of correction at any time. On a monthly basis, the department shall publish an aggregate report on non- production on its website and submit such a report to correctional health services and the city council. This report shall also contain an aggregate count of reasons for production refusal or walkout, if given, and the facility. e. Where individuals are not produced to a health care professional for a medical appointment, correctional health services will provide to the department the names of such individuals and a specified time-frame of when they should be produced as deemed clinically appropriate. When individuals are not produced within the specified time-frame, correctional health services shall notify the facility's commanding officer, along with a production recommendation based on correctional health's clinical expertise. § 9-109 Classification. The commissioner of correction shall so far as practicable classify all felons, misdemeanants and violators of local laws under the commissioner's charge, so that the youthful or less hardened offenders shall be segregated from the older or more hardened offenders. The commissioner of correction may set apart one or more of the penal institutions for the custody of such youthful or less hardened offenders, and he or she is empowered to transfer such offenders thereto from any penal institution of the city. The commissioner of correction is empowered to classify the transferred incarcerated individuals, so far as practicable, with regard to age, nature of offense, or other fact, and to separate or group such offenders according to such classification. § 9-110 Education and programming. The commissioner of correction may establish and maintain schools or classes for the instruction and training of the incarcerated individuals of any institution under the commissioner's charge, and shall offer to all incarcerated individuals incarcerated for more than 10 days a minimum of five hours per day of incarcerated individual programming or education, excluding weekends and holidays. Such programming or education may be provided by the department or by another provider, and need not be offered to incarcerated individuals in punitive segregation, or to incarcerated individuals who may be ineligible or unavailable for such programming or education, or where offering such programming or education would not be consistent with the safety of the incarcerated individual, staff or facility. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the department from offering such programming or education on the basis of incentive-based criteria developed by the department. For the purposes of this section, the term incarcerated individual programming has the same meaning as in section 9-144. § 9-111 Libraries. a. The commissioner of correction is empowered to set aside in the city prison a sufficient space for the purposes of installing a library for the incarcerated individuals. The commissioner of correction may do likewise in any other place in which persons are held for infractions of the law pending a determination by a court. b. The commissioner of correction is authorized to accept contributions of books, pamphlets and periodicals. All such contributions shall be recorded and catalogued; an account thereof shall be kept and a report concerning the same shall be made to the commissioner of correction at least once in each calendar year. § 9-112 Suspension of members of the uniformed force. Where a member of the uniformed force shall be charged with the commission of a crime, he or she may be suspended without pay for the duration of the time that said criminal charges are pending final disposition. If the member is found not guilty of such criminal charges he or she shall be paid full back pay for the period of suspension. However, after the final disposition of said criminal charges no member of the uniformed force shall be suspended without pay for more than thirty days while awaiting disposition of departmental charges against such member. If the member is found not guilty of the departmental charges such member shall be paid full back pay for the period he or she had been suspended while awaiting disposition of the departmental charges against such member. In the event an award of back pay is made pursuant to this section, the amount of any salary or income earned by the member of the uniformed force during the period of suspension shall be deducted from the award. § 9-113 Resignation by members of the uniformed force of the department of correction. Absence, without leave and without an explanation, of any member of the force for five consecutive work days shall be deemed and held to be a resignation, and the member so absent shall, at the expiration of such period, cease to be a member of the force and be dismissed therefrom. § 9-114 Discipline of incarcerated individuals. a. Officers in any institution in the department of correction shall use all suitable means to defend themselves, to enforce discipline, and to secure the persons of incarcerated individuals who shall: 1. Neglect or refuse to perform the work assigned by the officer in charge of the institution. 2. Wilfully violate the rules and regulations established by the commissioner of correction. 3. Resist or disobey any lawful command. 4. Offer violence to any officer or to any other prisoner. 5. Injure or attempt to injure any such institution or the appurtenances thereof or any property therein. 6. Attempt to escape. 7. Combine with any one or more persons for any of the aforesaid purposes. b. The officers in any institution of the department of correction shall not inflict any blows upon a prisoner except in self-defense or to suppress a revolt or insurrection. § 9-115 Correction officers (women) in prisons for women. a. Women correction officers shall have charge of and shall supervise all female prisoners and all parts of prisons occupied by such prisoners, or such parts thereof as the officer in command shall designate to be under their supervision. At least one woman correction officer shall be on duty in each prison as long as any female prisoner is detained therein. b. Women correction officers shall search all women visiting any part of such prisons, except as otherwise ordered by the commissioner. Only women correction officers shall be admitted to the corridor or cells of the female prisoners without the consent of the officer in charge of the prison. § 9-116 Three platoon system. a. Unless expressly otherwise provided, whenever used in this section, the following terms shall mean and include: 1. Custodial officer shall mean and include any and all correction officers (male), any and all captains, any and all correction officers (female), and any and all supervising correction officers (female). For the purposes of this section each of the titles enumerated herein shall constitute a single employee classification. 2. Working cycle shall mean and include that period of time within which each custodial officer in an employee classification at an institution shall be assigned to the same number of each of the normal tours of duty. Working cycles may vary as between institutions, and may vary as to the different employee classifications in the same or different institutions, but in no case may a working cycle exceed one calendar year in duration. b. The commissioner of correction or other officer or officers having the management, control or direction of the department of correction shall divide all the custodial officers in each employee classification into three platoons at each institution. No one of such platoons nor any member thereof shall be assigned to more than one tour of duty, to consist of not more than ten consecutive hours in each consecutive twenty-four hours, excepting only that in the event of riots, prison breaks or other similar emergencies, so many of said platoons or of the members thereof as may be necessary, may be continued on duty for such hours as may be necessary. For the purpose of changing tours of duty and for the necessary time consumed therein, said platoons or members thereof shall be continued on duty until relieved. c. Tours of duty shall commence at midnight, eight o'clock ante meridian and four o'clock post meridian of each consecutive twenty-four hours. Such tours of duty shall hereinafter be designated as normal tours of duty. At the discretion of the warden or other officer or officers in charge of an institution, other tours of duty may be created. Such tours of duty shall hereinafter be designated as miscellaneous tours of duty. Within each complete working cycle at each institution, every custodial officer in the same employee classification shall be assigned to the same number of each of the normal tours of duty. For the purpose of such assignment of normal tours of duty as hereinbefore prescribed, miscellaneous tours of duty which commence at or after seven o'clock ante meridian and at or before eleven o'clock ante meridian shall be considered to be a part of that normal tour of duty which commences at eight o'clock ante meridian; miscellaneous tours of duty which commence after eleven o'clock ante meridian and before eight o'clock post meridian shall be considered to be a part of that normal tour of duty which commences at four o'clock post meridian; miscellaneous tours of duty which commence at or after eight o'clock post meridian and before seven o'clock ante meridian shall be considered to be a part of that normal tour of duty which commences at midnight. All normal tours of duty which commence at midnight or at four o'clock post meridian, and all miscellaneous tours of duty which shall be considered a part of these normal tours of duty as hereinbefore prescribed, shall be changed at least once in every calendar month. Every member of each platoon shall be entitled to at least one calendar day of rest upon the completion of every six tours of duty. This day of rest shall not be deferred longer than one calendar week after such member has become entitled thereto. None of the foregoing provisions of this section shall apply to or govern the rotation of tours of duty of custodial officers who may be detailed or assigned to an institution wherein no incarcerated individuals are detained overnight. Where in any single institution the total number of custodial officers in any single employee classification is less than four in number, none of the foregoing provisions of this section shall apply to or govern the rotation of tours of duty of members of such employee classification in said institution. None of the foregoing provisions of this section shall apply to or govern the rotation of tours of duty of custodial officers who may be detailed or assigned to what shall hereinafter be known and designated as the special duty squad at each institution, provided, however, that the number of custodial officers detailed or assigned to a special duty squad at any single institution may not exceed twenty-five per centum of the total number of custodial officers employed at the said institution; provided, however, that custodial officers detailed or assigned to special duty squads may be assigned only to that normal tour of duty commencing at eight o'clock ante meridian, or to miscellaneous tours of duty constituting a part of such normal tour of duty; and provided further, however, that throughout the department of correction the total number of custodial officers detailed or assigned to steady tours of duty, whether as members of special duty squads or otherwise, shall not exceed fifteen per centum of the total number of custodial officers employed in the department of correction. None of the foregoing provisions of this subdivision shall apply to or govern the rotation of tours of duty of custodial officers who may be detailed or assigned to steady tours of duty for reasons of management efficiency, which reasons shall presumptively include the subdivision of a facility and/or unit into smaller units of management. d. All custodial officers shall be allowed a vacation period as may be authorized in leave regulations promulgated by the mayor. During an emergency, as defined herein, the vacation period may be withheld for such length of time as may be necessary. Upon cessation of such emergency each of such custodial officers from whom a vacation or a portion of a vacation shall have been withheld during such emergency, shall receive within six months from such cessation a leave of absence with pay commensurate with the number of days of such vacation withheld. e. [Repealed]. f. All general or specific laws inconsistent with this section or with any part thereof are hereby repealed; provided, however, that this section shall in no manner affect any provisions of said law concerning furlough or leave of absence or exempting members of the department of correction from obligation to wear uniform when not on actual duty. § 9-117 Composition of uniformed force of department of correction; uniforms. a. The uniformed force of the department of correction shall consist of the following ranks: 1. Correction officers. 2. Captains. 3. Assistant deputy wardens. 4. Deputy wardens. 5. Wardens. b. 1. The composition of the uniformed force as established by this section shall be altered only by the creation therein of new positions or ranks the appointments to which shall be made only from a list promulgated as the result of a promotion examination. In such examination only members of the uniformed force shall be eligible to compete. 2. The duty of maintaining the custody and supervision of persons detained or confined by the department of correction shall be performed solely by members of the uniformed force and shall not be delegated, transferred or assigned in whole or in part to private persons or entities. 3. Nothing in this subdivision shall limit in any way persons who are or will be employed by or under contract with the department of correction from maintaining incidental supervision and custody of an incarcerated individual, where the primary duties and responsibilities of such persons and contractors consist of administering or providing programs and services to persons detained or confined in any of its facilities; nor shall anything in this subdivision be construed to limit or affect the existing authority of the mayor and commissioner to appoint non-uniformed persons, whose duties include overall security of the department of correction, to positions of authority. c. The uniforms to be worn by the members of the force shall be prescribed by the commissioner of correction. § 9-117.1 Receipt of line of duty pay. a. A correction officer of the department of correction shall be entitled pursuant to this section to the full amount of his or her regular salary for the period of any incapacity due to illness or injury incurred in the performance and discharge of duty as a correction officer, as determined by the department. b. Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the rights, powers and duties of the commissioner pursuant to any other provision of law, including, but not limited to, the right to discipline a correction officer by termination, reduction of salary, or any other appropriate measure; the power to terminate an appointee who has not completed his or her probationary term; and the power to apply for ordinary or accident disability retirement for a correction officer. c. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require payment of salary to a correction officer who has been terminated, retired, suspended or otherwise separated from service by reason of death, retirement or any other cause. d. A decision as to eligibility for benefits pursuant to this section shall not be binding on the medical board or the board of trustees of any pension fund in the determination of eligibility for an accident disability or accidental death benefit. e. As used in this section the term incapacity shall mean the inability to perform full, limited, or restricted duty. § 9-118 Commissaries. a. The commissioner of correction may establish a commissary in any institution under the commissioner's jurisdiction for the use and benefit of the incarcerated individuals and employees thereof. All moneys received from the sales of such commissaries shall be paid over semi-monthly to the commissioner of finance without deduction. Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, the provisions of section 12-114 of the code shall apply to every officer or employee who receives such moneys in the performance of his or her duties in any such commissary. The accounts of the commissaries shall be subject to supervision, examination and audit by the comptroller and all other powers of the comptroller in accordance with the provisions of the charter and code. b. All moneys received from the sales from such commissaries shall be kept in a separate and distinct fund to be known as the commissary fund. Such fund shall be used for: 1. The purchase of all merchandise for resale in such commissaries; 2. The purchase of supplies, materials, and equipment for such commissaries; 3. The furnishing of work or labor to be done for such commissaries; and 4. All other costs and expenses of operating such commissaries other than the salaries of officers and employees employed in such commissaries. c. Any surplus remaining in the commissary fund after deducting all items described in subdivision b hereof shall be used for the general welfare of the incarcerated individuals of the institutions under the jurisdiction of the department of correction. In the event such fund at any time exceeds one hundred thousand dollars, the excess shall be transferred to the general fund. d. All expenditures for items described in paragraph one of subdivision b of this section shall be made upon vouchers issued by the commissioner of correction and subject to audit by the comptroller. All other expenditures described in subdivision b and subdivision c of this section shall be made by the commissioner in accordance with schedules approved by the mayor or of the director of the budget acting in accordance with a delegation of power from the mayor. All supplies, materials, equipment and merchandise to be furnished and all work or labor to be done, the cost of which is payable from the commissary fund, shall be furnished or provided in accordance with the provisions of chapter one of title six of the charter and of the code. e. The salaries of the employees of such commissaries shall be fixed by the mayor. f. Any officer or employee, whose duties in connection with the commissary fund involve possession of or control over funds, shall execute a bond to the city for the faithful performance of his or her duties in such sum as may be fixed and with sureties to be approved by the comptroller. § 9-119 Requisitions. The chief officer of any institution under the charge of the commissioner of correction shall make his or her requisitions in writing upon the commissioner for all articles such officer deems necessary to be used in such institution. Such officer shall keep an accurate account thereof. § 9-120 Reports of subordinate officers. The chief officer of any institution under the charge of the commissioner of correction shall report once in each week to the commissioner of correction. Such report shall set forth: 1. The number of persons who have been received, discharged or transferred. 2. The number who have become sick or who have died. 3. The number remaining in the institution under the charge of such chief officer. 4. The discipline which has been maintained. 5. The quantity and kind of labor performed. 6. Such other information as the commissioner of correction requires. § 9-121 Records of incarcerated individuals of institutions. The commissioner of correction shall keep and preserve a proper record of all persons who shall come under the commissioner's care or custody, and of the disposition of each, with full particulars as to the name, age, sex, color, nativity and religious faith, together with a statement of the cause and length of detention. Except as otherwise provided by law, the records kept pursuant to this section shall be public and shall be open to public inspection. § 9-122 Labor of prisoners in other agencies; correction officers. A correction officer or correction officers from the department of correction shall at all times direct and guard all incarcerated individuals of any of the institutions in the department of correction who are performing work for any other agency. § 9-123 Cultivation of land. The commissioner of correction may use for agricultural purposes all the lands under his or her jurisdiction which are capable of cultivation and which are not otherwise occupied or utilized. § 9-124 Manufacturing fund. The establishment of a fund to be known as manufacturing fund, department of correction, is authorized. The comptroller is directed to place in such fund all moneys received or realized through the sale of articles manufactured by the department of correction. The comptroller is authorized to charge against such fund any voucher received from the department of correction for the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment, repairs, replacements and royalties on manufacturing industry machines to be used in its manufacturing industries. The comptroller is further directed to transfer to the general fund of the city at the end of each calendar year any sums remaining in such manufacturing fund in excess of seventy-five thousand dollars of the unencumbered balance. § 9-125 Civil jail. a. The commissioner of correction shall have custody of civil prisoners and the prisons wherein they are confined. b. The commissioner of correction may keep in any place or places under the commissioner's jurisdiction persons lawfully committed to his or her custody without regard to the county wherein such persons may have been arrested. Any such person who is entitled to the liberties of the jail must be admitted to the jail liberties of the county wherein such person was originally arrested. § 9-126 Jurisdiction of commissioner of correction over civil prisoners. Any part of the institutions under the jurisdiction of the commissioner of correction which shall be set aside for the accommodation of prisoners detained by civil process shall be under the control of such commissioner of correction. § 9-127 Housing, employment and sobriety needs. a. The department of correction and the department of homeless services shall develop a process for identifying individuals who repeatedly are admitted to city correctional institutions and who, in addition, either immediately before their admission to or after their release from such institutions, are housed in shelter provided by the department of homeless services. b. The department of correction shall collect, from any sentenced incarcerated individual who will serve, after sentencing, ten days or more in any city correctional institution, information relating to such incarcerated individual's housing, employment and sobriety needs. The department of correction shall, with the consent of such incarcerated individual, provide such information to any social service organization that is providing discharge planning services to such incarcerated individual under contract with the department of correction. For the purposes of this section and sections 9-128 and 9-129 of this title, discharge planning shall mean the creation of a plan for post-release services and assistance with access to community-based resources and government benefits designed to promote an incarcerated individual's successful reintegration into the community. § 9-127.1 Discharge planning. a. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Discharge plan. The term discharge plan means a plan describing the manner in which an eligible incarcerated individual will be able to receive re- entry services upon release from the custody of the department to the community. A discharge plan shall, to the extent practicable, be designed to address the unique needs of each eligible incarcerated individual, including but not limited to the incarcerated individual's geographic location upon release from the custody of the department, specific social service needs if applicable, prior criminal history, and employment needs. Eligible incarcerated individual. The term eligible incarcerated individual means a person who served a sentence of 30 days or more in the custody of the department, and who is being released from the custody of the department to the community. Re-entry services. The term re-entry services means appropriate programming and support planning offered to an incarcerated individual upon release from the custody of the department to the community, as well as follow- up support offered to the incarcerated individual after his or her release. Such programming, support planning, and follow-up support shall include case management and connections to employment, and other social services that may be available to such incarcerated individual upon his or her release. b. Prior to the release of an eligible incarcerated individual from the custody of the department, a designee of the department shall to the extent practicable develop and offer to such incarcerated individual a discharge plan. Discharge plans developed pursuant to this section shall not be required when, upon release from the custody of the department, an incarcerated individual is transferred to the custody of another government agency or to the custody of a hospital or healthcare provider, or where a discharge plan is otherwise required by law. § 9-128 Applications for government benefits. a. The department of correction shall make applications for government benefits available to incarcerated individuals by providing such applications in areas accessible to incarcerated individuals in city correctional institutions. b. The department of correction shall provide assistance with the preparation of applications for government benefits and identification to sentenced incarcerated individuals who will serve, after sentencing, thirty days or more in any city correctional institution and who receive discharge planning services from the department of correction or any social services organization under contract with the department of correction, and, in its discretion, to any other incarcerated individual who may benefit from such assistance. c. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any person born in the city of New York and sentenced to ninety days or more in a New York city correctional facility who will serve, after sentencing, thirty days or more in a New York city correctional facility, shall be provided by the department before or at release, or within two weeks thereafter if extenuating circumstances exist, at no cost to such person, a certified copy of his or her birth certificate to be used for any lawful purpose; provided that such person has requested a copy of his or her birth certificate from the department at least two weeks prior to release. Upon such request, the department shall request such certificate from the department of health and mental hygiene in a form and manner approved by the commissioner of the department of health and mental hygiene. The department shall inform such person of his or her ability to receive such certificate pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision within three days of his or her admission to a sentencing facility. No person shall receive more than one birth certificate without charge pursuant to this subdivision. d. Upon release, the department of correction shall provide a letter of incarceration to every person discharged from a New York city correctional facility, regardless of whether such person was held pre-trial or was subject to an order of commitment that provided that such incarcerated individual remain in the custody of the department. Such letter shall specify both the date the person entered and the date such person was released from the custody of the department. § 9-129 Reporting. The commissioner of correction shall submit a report to the mayor and the council by October first of each year regarding implementation of sections 9-127 and 9-128 of this title and other discharge planning efforts, and, beginning October first, two thousand eight and annually thereafter, regarding recidivism among incarcerated individuals receiving discharge planning services from the department of correction or any social services organization under contract with the department of correction. § 9-130 Jail data reporting. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Adolescent. The term adolescent means an incarcerated individual 16 or 17 years of age. Adult. The term adult means an incarcerated individual 22 years of age or older. Assault. The term assault means any action taken with intent to cause physical injury to another person. Department. The term department means the New York city department of correction. Hospital. The term hospital includes any hospital setting, whether a hospital outside of the department's jurisdiction or a correction unit operated by the department within a hospital. Serious injury. The term serious injury means a physical injury that (i) creates a substantial risk of death or disfigurement; (ii) is a loss or impairment of a bodily organ; (iii) is a fracture or break to a bone other than fingers and toes; or (iv) is an injury defined as serious by a physician. Sexual abuse. The term sexual abuse has the same meaning as set forth in 28 CFR § 115.6, or successor regulation, promulgated pursuant to the federal prison rape elimination act of 2003. Staff. The term staff means anyone other than an incarcerated individual who works at a facility operated by the department. Young adult. The term young adult means an incarcerated individual 18 to 21 years of age. Use of force A. The term use of force A means a use of force by staff on an incarcerated individual resulting in an injury that requires medical treatment beyond the prescription of over-the-counter analgesics or the administration of minor first aid, including those uses of force resulting in one or more of the following: (i) multiple abrasions and/or contusions; (ii) chipped or cracked tooth; (iii) loss of tooth; (iv) laceration; (v) puncture; (vi) fracture; (vii) loss of consciousness, including a concussion; (viii) suture; (ix) internal injuries, including but not limited to ruptured spleen or perforated eardrum; or (x) admission to a hospital. Use of force B. The term use of force B means a use of force by staff on an incarcerated individual which does not require hospitalization or medical treatment beyond the prescription of over-the-counter analgesics or the administration of minor first aid, including the following: (i) a use of force resulting in a superficial bruise, scrape, scratch, or minor swelling; and (ii) the forcible use of mechanical restraints in a confrontational situation that results in no or minor injury. Use of force C. The term use of force C means a use of force by staff on an incarcerated individual resulting in no injury to staff or incarcerated individual, including an incident where the use of oleoresin capsicum spray results in no injury, beyond irritation that can be addressed through decontamination. b. No later than 20 days after the end of each month, the department shall post on its website a report containing the following information for the prior month, in total and by indicating the rate per 100 incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department during such prior month: 1. fight infractions written against incarcerated individuals; 2. assaults on incarcerated individuals by incarcerated individuals involving stabbings, shootings or slashings; 3. assaults on incarcerated individuals by incarcerated individuals in which an incarcerated individual suffered a serious injury, excluding assaults involving stabbings, shootings or slashings; 4. actual incidents of use of force A; 5. actual incidents of use of force B; 6. actual incidents of use of force C; 7. assaults on staff by incarcerated individuals in which staff suffered serious injury. c. No later than 45 days after the end of each quarter ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31, the department shall post on its website a report containing the following information for the prior quarter, in total and by indicating the rate per 100 incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department during such prior quarter. Such report shall also disaggregate the following information by listing adults, young adults, and adolescent incarcerated individuals separately: 1. fight infractions written against incarcerated individuals; 2. assaults on incarcerated individuals by incarcerated individuals in which an incarcerated individual suffered a serious injury, excluding assaults involving stabbings, shootings or slashings; 3. assaults on incarcerated individuals by incarcerated individuals involving stabbings; 4. assaults on incarcerated individuals by incarcerated individuals involving shootings; 5. assaults on incarcerated individuals by incarcerated individuals involving slashings; 6. total number of assaults on incarcerated individuals by incarcerated individuals involving stabbings, shootings or slashings; 7. total number of assaults on incarcerated individuals by incarcerated individuals involving stabbings, shootings or slashings in which an incarcerated individual suffered a serious injury; 8. assaults on incarcerated individuals by incarcerated individuals in which an incarcerated individual was admitted to a hospital as a result; 9. homicides of incarcerated individuals by incarcerated individuals; 10. attempted suicides by incarcerated individuals; 11. suicides by incarcerated individuals; 12. assaults on staff by incarcerated individuals; 13. assaults on staff by incarcerated individuals in which staff suffered serious injury; 14. assaults on staff by incarcerated individuals in which the staff was transported to a hospital as a result; 15. incidents in which an incarcerated individual splashed staff; 16. allegations of use of force A; 17. actual incidents of use of force A; 18. incarcerated individual hospitalization as a result of use of force A; 19. allegations of use of force B; 20. actual incidents of use of force B; 21. allegations of use of force C; 22. actual incidents of use of force C; 23. incidents of use of force C in which chemical agents were used; 24. incidents of use of force in which staff uses any device capable of administering an electric shock. d. Beginning July 1, 2016 and every July first thereafter, the department shall post on its website a report for the prior calendar year containing information pertaining to (1) allegations of sexual abuse of an incarcerated individual by an incarcerated individual; (2) substantiated incidents of sexual abuse of an incarcerated individual by an incarcerated individual; (3) allegations of sexual abuse of an incarcerated individual by staff; and (4) substantiated incidents of sexual abuse of an incarcerated individual by staff. e. The information in subdivisions b, c and d of this section shall be compared to previous reporting periods, and shall be permanently stored on the department's website. § 9-131 Persons not to be detained. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Civil immigration detainer shall mean a detainer issued pursuant to 8 CFR § 287.7 or any similar federal request for detention of a person suspected of violating civil immigration law. 2. Convicted of a violent or serious crime shall mean a judgment pursuant to section 1.20(15) of the criminal procedure law entered on a violent or serious crime or a conviction under federal law or the law of another state that would constitute a predicate felony conviction under section 70.06(1)(b) (i) of the penal law provided that such conviction was for the equivalent of a violent or serious crime. A person shall not be considered convicted of a violent or serious crime if that person: i. was adjudicated as a youthful offender, pursuant to article seven hundred twenty of the criminal procedure law, or a comparable status pursuant to federal law or the law of another state, or a juvenile delinquent, as defined by subdivision one of section 301.2 of the family court act, or a comparable status pursuant to federal law or the law of another state; or ii. has not had a judgment pursuant to section 1.20(15) of the criminal procedure law entered against him or her on a violent or serious crime for at least five years prior to the date of the instant arrest, provided that any period of time during which the person was incarcerated for a violent or serious crime, between the time of the commission of such violent or serious crime and the instant arrest, shall be excluded in calculating such five year period and such five year period shall be extended by a period or periods equal to the time served under such incarceration. 3. Department shall mean the New York city department of correction and shall include all officers, employees and persons otherwise paid by or acting as agents of the department. 4. Federal immigration authorities shall mean any officer, employee or person otherwise paid by or acting as an agent of United States immigration and customs enforcement or any division thereof or any other officer, employee or person otherwise paid by or acting as an agent of the United States department of homeland security who is charged with enforcement of the civil provisions of the immigration and nationality act. 5. Judicial warrant shall mean a warrant based on probable cause and issued by a judge appointed pursuant to article III of the United States constitution or a federal magistrate judge appointed pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 631, that authorizes federal immigration authorities to take into custody the person who is the subject of such warrant. 6. Terrorist screening database shall mean the United States terrorist watch list or any similar or successor list maintained by the United States. 7. Violent or serious crime shall mean: i. a felony defined in any of the following sections of the penal law: 120.01, 120.02, 120.03, 120.04, 120.04-a(4), 120.05, 120.06, 120.07, 120.08, 120.09, 120.10, 120.11, 120.12, 120.13, 120.18, 120.25, 120.55, 120.60, 120.70, 121.12, 121.13, 125.10, 125.11, 125.12, 125.13, 125.14, 125.15, 125.20, 125.21, 125.22, 125.25, 125.26, 125.27, 125.40, 125.45, 130.25, 130.30, 130.35, 130.40, 130.45, 130.50, 130.53, 130.65, 130.65-a, 130.66, 130.67, 130.70, 130.75, 130.80, 130.85, 130.90, 130.95, 130.96, 135.10, 135.20, 135.25, 135.35, 135.50, 135.65(2)(b), 140.17, 140.25, 140.30, 145.12, 150.05, 150.10, 150.15, 150.20, 160.05, 160.10, 160.15, 195.07, 195.08, 195.17, 215.11, 215.12, 215.13, 215.15, 215.16, 215.17, 215.51, 215.52, 220.18, 220.21, 220.28, 220.41, 220.43, 220.44, 220.48, 220.77, 230.05, 230.06, 230.19, 230.25(2), 230.30, 230.32, 230.33, 230.34, 230.34-a, 235.22, 240.06, 240.55, 240.60, 240.61, 240.62, 240.63, 240.75, 241.05, 255.26, 255.27, 260.25, 260.32, 260.34, 263.05, 263.10, 263.11, 263.15, 263.16, 263.30, 265.01-a, 265.01-b, 265.02(2) through (8), 265.03, 265.04, 265.08, 265.09, 265.10, 265.11, 265.12, 265.13, 265.14, 265.16, 265.17, 265.19, 265.35(2), 270.30, 270.35, 405.16(1), 405.18, 460.22, 470.21, 470.22, 470.23, 470.24, 490.10, 490.15, 490.20, 490.25, 490.30, 490.35, 490.37, 490.40, 490.45, 490.47, 490.50, or 490.55; ii. a hate crime as defined in section 485.05 of the penal law, provided such hate crime constitutes a felony; iii. a felony attempt, felony conspiracy, or felony criminal solicitation to commit any crime specified in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, or a felony criminal facilitation of such specified crime; iv. any felony set forth in section 600 of the vehicle and traffic law; or v. any crime codified by the legislature subsequent to the enactment of this section that the department, in consultation with the police department, by rule determines to be a felony involving violence, force, firearms, terrorism, or endangerment or abuse of vulnerable persons, or any crime for which a change made by the legislature requires amendment of the crimes specified in this paragraph. The commissioner of correction shall submit any proposed additions to the crimes set forth in this paragraph to the speaker of the council at least sixty days prior to publishing such proposed rule. b. Prohibition on honoring a civil immigration detainer. 1. The department may only honor a civil immigration detainer by holding a person beyond the time when such person would otherwise be released from the department's custody, in addition to such reasonable time as is necessary to conduct the search specified in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, or by notifying federal immigration authorities of such person's release, if: i. federal immigration authorities present the department with a judicial warrant for the detention of the person who is the subject of such civil immigration detainer at the time such civil immigration detainer is presented; and ii. a search, conducted at or about the time when such individual would otherwise be released from the department's custody, of state and federal databases, or any similar or successor databases, accessed through the New York state division of criminal justice services e-JusticeNY computer application, or any similar or successor computer application maintained by the city of New York or state of New York, indicates, or the department has been informed by a court or any other governmental entity, that such person: A. has been convicted of a violent or serious crime, or B. is identified as a possible match in the terrorist screening database. 2. Nothing in this section shall affect the obligation of the department to maintain the confidentiality of any information obtained pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision. c. No conferral of authority. Nothing in this section shall be construed to confer any authority on any entity to hold individuals on civil immigration detainers beyond the authority, if any, that existed prior to the enactment of this section. d. No conflict with existing law. This local law supersedes all conflicting policies, rules, procedures and practices of the city of New York. Nothing in this local law shall be construed to prohibit any city agency from cooperating with federal immigration authorities when required under federal law. Nothing in this local law shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power, duty or obligation in conflict with any federal or state law. e. No private right of action. Nothing contained in this section or in the administration or application hereof shall be construed as creating any private right of action on the part of any persons or entity against the city of New York or the department, or any official or employee thereof. f. Reporting. No later than September 1, 2018 and no later than September 1 of each year thereafter, the department shall post a report on the department website that includes the following information for the preceding twelve month period ending June 30: 1. the total number of civil immigration detainers lodged with the department, disaggregated to the extent possible by the reason given by federal immigration authorities for issuing detainers, including, but not limited to, that federal immigration authorities: i. had reason to believe that the persons in the department's custody are subject to removal from the United States; ii. initiated removal proceedings and served a notice to appear or other charging document on persons in the department's custody; iii. served a warrant of arrest for removal proceedings on persons in the department's custody; or iv. obtained orders of deportation or removal from the United States for persons in the department's custody; 2. the number of persons held pursuant to civil immigration detainers beyond the time when such person would otherwise be released from the department's custody, disaggregated to the extent possible by the reason given by federal immigration authorities for issuing the detainers, including, but not limited to, that federal immigration authorities: i. had reason to believe that the persons in the department's custody are subject to removal from the United States; ii. initiated removal proceedings and served a notice to appear or other charging document on persons in the department's custody; iii. served a warrant of arrest for removal proceedings on persons in the department's custody; or iv. obtained orders of deportation or removal from the United States for persons in the department's custody; 3. the number of persons transferred to the custody of federal immigration authorities pursuant to civil immigration detainers; 4. the number of persons transferred to the custody of federal immigration authorities pursuant to civil immigration detainers who had at least one conviction for a violent or serious crime; 5. the number of persons transferred to the custody of federal immigration authorities pursuant to civil immigration detainers who had no convictions for a violent or serious crime and were identified as possible matches in the terrorist screening database; 6. the amount of state criminal alien assistance funding requested and received from the federal government; 7. the number of persons for whom civil immigration detainers were not honored pursuant to subdivision b of this section; 8. the number of persons held pursuant to civil immigration detainers beyond the time when such persons would otherwise have been released from the department's custody who were not transferred to the custody of federal immigration authorities either because of the expiration of the forty-eight- hour hold period provided in 8 CFR § 287.7 or because federal immigration authorities disavowed an intention to assume custody; and 9. the number of requests from federal immigration authorities concerning a person's incarceration status, release dates, court appearance dates, or any other information related to such person in the department's custody, and the number of responses honoring such requests by the department, disaggregated by: i. the number of responses to federal immigration authorities concerning a person with no convictions for a violent or serious crime, disaggregated by the number of such responses that included incarceration status, release dates, court appearance dates, or other types of information, and whether the department facilitated the transfer of such persons to the custody of federal immigration authorities; ii. the number of responses to federal immigration authorities concerning a person with at least one conviction for a violent or serious crime, disaggregated by the number of such responses that included incarceration status, release dates, court appearance dates, or other types of information, and whether the department facilitated the transfer of such persons to the custody of federal immigration authorities; and iii. the number of responses to federal immigration authorities concerning a person with no convictions for a violent or serious crime who was identified as a possible match in the terrorist screening database, disaggregated by the number of such responses that included incarceration status, release dates, court appearance dates, or other types of information, and whether the department facilitated the transfer of such persons to the custody of federal immigration authorities. g. For the purpose of this section, any reference to a statute, rule, or regulation shall be deemed to include any successor provision. h. Use of city land or facilities by federal immigration authorities and access to persons in custody. 1. Department personnel shall not expend time while on duty or department resources of any kind disclosing information that belongs to the department and is available to them only in their official capacity, in response to federal immigration inquiries or in communicating with federal immigration authorities regarding any person's incarceration status, release dates, court appearance dates, or any other information related to persons in the department's custody, other than information related to a person's citizenship or immigration status, unless such response or communication: (i) relates to a person convicted of a violent or serious crime or identified as a possible match in the terrorist screening database; (ii) is unrelated to the enforcement of civil immigration laws; or (iii) is otherwise required by law. 2. Federal immigration authorities shall not be permitted to maintain an office or quarters on land over which the department exercises jurisdiction, for the purpose of investigating possible violations of civil immigration law; provided, however, that the mayor may, by executive order, authorize federal immigration authorities to maintain an office or quarters on such land for purposes unrelated to the enforcement of civil immigration laws. § 9-132 Hart's Island electronic burial database. a. The department of correction shall post and maintain an electronic database of all burials on Hart's Island since nineteen hundred seventy-seven on the department's website, and shall not charge a fee to the public to search such database. § 9-133 Hart's Island visitation policy. a. The department of correction shall reduce its Hart's Island visitation policy to writing, post such policy on the department of correction website and make it available to anyone who requests a copy. § 9-134 Jail segregated housing statistics. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Department. The term department means the New York city department of correction. Incarcerated individual recreation day. The term incarcerated individual recreation day means one day per each individual for every day in punitive segregation during each quarter. Incarcerated individual shower day. The term incarcerated individual shower day means one day per each individual for every day in punitive segregation during each quarter. Mental health unit (MHU). The term mental health unit (MHU) means any separate housing area staffed by mental health clinicians where incarcerated individuals with mental illness who have been found guilty of violating department rules are housed, including but not limited to restricted housing units and clinical alternative to punitive segregation units. Segregated housing unit. The term segregated housing unit means any city jail housing units in which incarcerated individuals are regularly restricted to their cells more than the maximum number of hours as set forth in subdivision (b) of section 1-05 of chapter 1 of title 40 of the rules of the city of New York, or any successor rule establishing such maximum number of hours for the general population of incarcerated individuals in city jails. Segregated housing units do not include mental health units. Segregated housing units include, but are not limited to, punitive segregation housing and enhanced supervision housing. Serious injury. The term serious injury means a physical injury that includes: (i) a substantial risk of death or disfigurement; (ii) loss or impairment of a bodily organ; (iii) a fracture or break to a bone, excluding fingers and toes; (iv) an injury defined as serious by a physician; and (v) any additional serious injury as defined by the department. Staff. The term staff means anyone, other than an incarcerated individual, working at a facility operated by the department. Use of force. The term use of force means an instance where staff used their hands or other parts of their body, objects, instruments, chemical agents, electric devices, firearm, or any other physical method to restrain, subdue, or compel an incarcerated individual to act in a particular way, or stop acting in a particular way. This term shall not include moving, escorting, transporting, or applying restraints to a compliant incarcerated individual. Use of force A. The term use of force A means a use of force resulting in an injury that requires medical treatment beyond the prescription of over- the-counter analgesics or the administration of minor first aid, including, but not limited to: (i) multiple abrasions and/or contusions; (ii) chipped or cracked tooth; (iii) loss of tooth; (iv) laceration; (v) puncture; (vi) fracture; (vii) loss of consciousness, including a concussion; (viii) suture; (ix) internal injuries, including but not limited to ruptured spleen or perforated eardrum; or (x) admission to a hospital. Use of force B. The term use of force B means a use of force resulting in an injury that does not require hospitalization or medical treatment beyond the prescription of over-the-counter analgesics or the administration of minor first aid. Use of force C. The term use of force C means a use of force resulting in no injury to staff or incarcerated individuals. b. For the quarter beginning October first, two thousand fourteen, commencing on or before January twentieth, two thousand fifteen, and on or before the twentieth day of each quarter thereafter, the commissioner of correction shall post a report on the department website containing information relating to the use of segregated housing units and MHU in city jails for the previous quarter. Such quarterly report shall include separate indicators, disaggregated by facility and housing category for the total number of incarcerated individuals housed in segregated housing units and MHU. Such quarterly report shall also include the following information regarding the segregated housing unit and MHU population: (i) the number of incarcerated individuals in each security risk group as defined by the department's classification system directive, (ii) the number of incarcerated individuals subject to enhanced restraints, including but not limited to, shackles, waist chains and hand mittens, (iii) the number of incarcerated individuals sent to segregated housing units and MHU during the period, (iv) the number of incarcerated individuals sent to segregated housing units and MHU from mental observation housing areas, (v) the number of incarcerated individuals, by highest infraction offense grade as classified by the department, (grade one, two, or three), (vi) the number of incarcerated individuals serving punitive segregation in the following specified ranges: less than ten days, ten to thirty days, thirty-one to ninety days, ninety-one to one hundred eighty days, one hundred eighty-one to three hundred sixty-five days, and more than three hundred sixty-five days, (vii) the number of incarcerated individuals receiving mental health services, (viii) the number of incarcerated individuals twenty- one years of age and under, (ix) the number of incarcerated individuals over twenty-one years of age in ten-year intervals, (x) the race and gender of incarcerated individuals, (xi) the number of incarcerated individuals who received infractions while in segregated housing units or MHU, (xii) the number of incarcerated individuals who received infractions that led to the imposition of additional punitive segregation time, (xiii) the number of incarcerated individuals who committed suicide, (xiv) the number of incarcerated individuals who attempted suicide, (xv) the number of incarcerated individuals on suicide watch, (xvi) the number of incarcerated individuals who caused injury to themselves (excluding suicide attempt), (xvii) the number of incarcerated individuals seriously injured while in segregated housing units or MHU, (xviii) the number of incarcerated individuals who were sent to non-psychiatric hospitals outside the city jails, (xix) the number of incarcerated individuals who died (non-suicide), (xx) the number of incarcerated individuals transferred to a psychiatric hospital from segregated housing units, (xxi) the number of incarcerated individuals transferred to a psychiatric hospital from MHU, disaggregated by program, (xxii) the number of incarcerated individuals moved from general punitive segregation to MHU, disaggregated by program, (xxiii) the number of incarcerated individuals placed into MHU following a disciplinary hearing, disaggregated by program, (xxiv) the number of incarcerated individuals moved from MHU to a segregated housing unit, disaggregated by segregated housing unit type, (xxv) the number of incarcerated individuals prescribed anti-psychotic medications, mood stabilizers or anti-anxiety medications, disaggregated by the type of medication, (xxvi) the number of requests made by incarcerated individuals for medical or mental health treatment and the number granted, (xxvii) the number of requests made by incarcerated individuals to attend congregate religious services and the number granted, (xxviii) the number of requests made by incarcerated individuals for assistance from the law library and the number granted, (xxix) the number of requests made by incarcerated individuals to make telephone calls and the number granted, disaggregated by weekly personal calls and other permissible daily calls, (xxx) the number of incarcerated individual recreation days and the number of recreation hours attended, (xxxi) the number of individual recreation hours that were offered to incarcerated individuals prior to six a.m., (xxxii) the number of incarcerated individual shower days and the number of showers taken, (xxxiii) the number of incarcerated individuals who received visits, (xxxiv) the number of instances of allegations of use of force, (xxxv) the number of instances of use of force A, (xxxvi) the number of instances of use of force B, (xxxvii) the number of instances of use of force C, (xxxviii) the number of instances in which contraband was found, (xxxix) the number of instances of allegations of staff on incarcerated individual sexual assault, (xl) the number of instances of substantiated staff on incarcerated individual sexual assault, (xli) the number of instances of allegations of incarcerated individual on staff sexual assault, and (xlii) the number of instances of substantiated incarcerated individual on staff sexual assault. § 9-135 Alternative housing unit waiting list. The commissioner shall post a report every 60 days, on the department of correction website, setting forth the number of city jail inmates who have been found guilty of violating departmental rules but have yet to be placed in punitive segregation, restrictive housing or a clinical alternative to punitive segregation housing, or any successor to such housing units, disaggregated by inmates with M designations at the end of their book and case numbers, indicating that the inmates are known to mental health staff, and inmates without M designations. Such report shall state the number of inmates awaiting placement in any such housing unit categorized by the length of time such inmates have been awaiting placement in the following categories: 1- 5 days, 6-15 days, 16-30 days, 31-60 days, and 61 days or longer. The commissioner shall also post, no later than 45 days after the end of each quarter, a quarterly report that sets forth the number of inmates awaiting transfer to the custody of the New York state department of health or the New York state department of people with developmental disabilities pursuant to section 730 of the criminal procedure law, the length of stay for such inmates, and the housing facility in which such inmates were placed. § 9-136 Grievance process. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Appeal. The term appeal means the action taken when an incarcerated individual's grievance is escalated to a higher level within the grievance process to review decisions regarding resolutions of grievances by incarcerated individuals. Grievable complaint. The term grievable complaint means a complaint handled by the office of constituent and grievance services. The term includes but is not limited to a complaint regarding classification, clothing, commissary, correspondence, employment, environmental, food, inmate account, housing, length of sentence, laundry, law library, medical, mental health, personal hygiene, phone, programs, property, recreation, religion, rules and regulations, school, search, social service, transportation, and visits. Non-grievable complaint. The term non-grievable complaint means any complaint which is not handled by the office of constituent and grievance services, including but not limited to a complaint regarding an allegation of assault, sexual assault/abuse, and verbal misconduct from a staff member; an allegation of assault, sexual assault/abuse, and non-sexual harassment from another incarcerated individual; individual security status; medical and mental health staff; request for accommodation due to a disability or claim of discrimination based on disability or perceived disability; request for protective custody; freedom of information laws, housing, and the grievance process. Office of constituent and grievance services. The office of constituent and grievance services means the unit within the department that facilitates a formal process established by the department that provides incarcerated individuals with the opportunity to resolve grievable complaints regarding their confinement. b. Forty-five days after the quarter beginning January 1, 2016, and no later than the forty-fifth day after the end of each subsequent quarter, the commissioner shall post on the department website a report containing the following information for the preceding quarter, in addition to all information in paragraphs 1 through 5 of section d in the aggregate 1. The number of grievable and non-grievable complaints submitted in all departmental facilities, in total and disaggregated by the facility and housing area type in which such grievance was submitted. 2. The number of grievable and non-grievable complaints submitted in all departmental facilities, disaggregated by grievance category, by the facility and housing area type in which such grievance was submitted, and by the method by which such grievance was submitted. 3. The number of grievable complaints, the stages of the grievance process, the stage in the grievance process at which they were resolved, and the categories for which any grievances were dismissed. 4. For non-grievable complaints, where such complaints were referred; 5. The number of incarcerated individuals that submitted grievances. c. [Reserved.] d. The department shall utilize an electronic tracking system to record all grievable and non-grievable complaints handled by the office of constituent and grievance services and shall provide the board of correction access to such system. Such system shall track the following: 1. Whether a complaint is subject to the process established by the office of constituent and grievance services, and if not, if and where the incarcerated individual was directed; 2. Whether the incarcerated individual pursued an appeal; 3. How and when the complaint was resolved, and at what stage the complaint was resolved; 4. Whether the complaint was made by the affected incarcerated person, an attorney or other advocate, a public official, or another third party; 5. The housing facility and housing area type where the complaint was made; e. Complaints and requests made by or on behalf of an incarcerated individual to 311 and forwarded to the department shall be addressed by the office of constituent and grievance services. f. The department shall ensure equal access to the office of constituent and grievance services, including the following procedures: 1. Evaluating the need for grievance boxes and strategically placing a number of boxes in locations where individuals in department custody frequently congregate, and at least one box in each facility. 2. Placing a number of dedicated personnel in each housing unit to conduct outreach. 3. Developing caseload guidelines for grievance coordinators and officers. g. The department shall install grievance kiosks in each facility where incarcerated individuals may file grievances electronically and in a private setting by December 31, 2026. Such kiosks shall be accessible in multiple languages and shall provide incarcerated individuals physical receipts confirming filing. If a request made through the kiosk is not subject to the grievance and review process, the kiosks shall provide incarcerated individuals with information regarding where the grievance should be redirected. h. Incarcerated individuals unable to read, access, or understand the grievance process shall be provided with assistance necessary to meaningfully engage in such process. § 9-137 Jail population statistics. a. Within 45 days of the end of each quarter of the fiscal year, the department shall post a report on its website containing information related to the incarcerated individual population in city jails for the preceding quarter. Such quarterly report shall include the following information based on the number of incarcerated individual admissions during the reporting period, and based on the average daily population of the city's jails for the preceding quarter in total, and as a percentage of the average daily population of incarcerated individuals in the department's custody during the reporting period: 1. Age, in years, disaggregated as follows: 16-17, 18-21, 22-25, 26-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, 60-69, 70 or older. 2. Gender, including a separate category for those incarcerated individuals housed in any transgender housing unit. 3. Race of incarcerated individuals, categorized as follows: African- American, Hispanic, Asian, white, or any other race. 4. The borough in which the incarcerated individual was arrested. 5. Educational background as self-reported by incarcerated individuals after admission to the custody of the department, categorized as follows based on the highest level of education achieved: no high school diploma or general education diploma, a general education diploma, a high school diploma, some college but no degree, an associate's degree, a bachelor's degree, or a post- collegiate degree. 6. The number of incarcerated individuals identified by the department as a member of a security risk group, as defined by the department. § 9-138 Use of force directive. The commissioner shall post on the department's website the directive stating the department's current policies regarding the use of force by departmental staff on incarcerated individuals, including but not limited to the circumstances in which any use of force is justified, the circumstances in which various levels of force or various uses of equipment are justified, and the procedures staff must follow prior to using force. The commissioner may redact such directive as necessary to preserve safety and security in the facilities under the department's control. § 9-139 Bill of rights for incarcerated individuals. a. The department shall inform every incarcerated individual upon admission to the custody of the department, in writing, using plain and simple language, of their rights under department policy, which shall be consistent with federal, state, and local laws, and board of correction minimum standards, on the following topics: non-discriminatory treatment, personal hygiene, recreation, religion, attorney visits, access to legal reference materials, visitation, telephone calls and other correspondence, media access, due process in any disciplinary proceedings, health services, safety from violence, and the grievance system. b. The department shall inform every incarcerated individual upon admission to the custody of the department, in writing, using plain and simple language, of their responsibilities under the department's rules governing their conduct. c. The department shall inform every incarcerated individual upon admission to the custody of the department, in writing, using plain and simple language, of available services relating to education, vocational development, drug and alcohol treatment and counseling, and mental health treatment and counseling services. d. The department shall publish on its website any documents created pursuant to this section. Such documents shall be available in English and Spanish. e. Within 24 hours of admission to the custody of the department, the department shall provide to each incarcerated individual an oral summary of the rights and responsibilities enumerated in subdivisions a, b, and c of this section in their preferred language, if the language is accessible through the city's language access plan. The department shall make a good faith effort to provide an oral summary in languages that are not accessible through the city's language access plan as soon as practicable. f. Upon admission to the custody of the department, each incarcerated individual shall also be offered the option of being provided the Connections guidebook for formerly incarcerated people, or any similar or successor book or handbook that describes resources available to those re-entering society after being incarcerated. g.* The department shall allow incarcerated individuals to decorate a designated area of their living quarters, with appropriate oversight from the department regarding safety and security considerations. g.* The department shall inform all incarcerated individuals in writing, using plain and simple language, of the protections against retaliation for filing a grievance, complaint, or request. The department shall also inform all incarcerated individuals in writing and in plain and simple language upon the filing of a grievance, complaint, or request, about which complaints are not subject to the grievance process; the process for resolving such complaints; and the protections against retaliation for filing such grievance, complaint, or request. Grievable complaints made through 311, to the board of correction, by email, by attorneys or other advocates, public officials, or other third parties on behalf of an incarcerated individual and over the phone shall be addressed by the office of constituent and grievance services. The department shall maintain a policy that requires its employees to refer to individuals in custody by their names and their preferred pronouns, if known and if practicable, and has zero tolerance for staff addressing individuals in custody using dehumanizing terms, such as the word body. h. The department shall include on all grievance forms instructions on how to appeal resolutions and post such forms on the department's website. § 9-140 Jail visitation statistics. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Borough jail facility. The term borough jail facility means any department facility in which incarcerated individuals are housed by the department and that is located outside Rikers Island. City jail. The term city jail means any department facility in which incarcerated individuals are housed by the department. Complaint. The term complaint means a report made to the department or received by the department from any other city entity regarding an alleged act of sexual abuse, sexual harassment, or intervention against a visitor, including reports made on behalf of another person. Intervention. The term intervention means an incident in which staff use their hands or other parts of their body, or other physical method to restrain, subdue, or compel a visitor to act or stop acting in a particular way. Professional. The term professional refers to people who are properly identified as providing services or assistance to incarcerated individuals, including but not limited to lawyers, doctors, religious advisors, public officials, therapists, counselors, and media representatives. Sexual abuse. The term sexual abuse includes any of the following acts against a visitor, performed by staff with or without consent of the visitor, including when such acts occur during the course of an otherwise authorized search procedure: (1) contact between the penis and the vulva or the penis and the anus, including but not limited to penetration, however slight; (2) contact between the mouth and the penis, vulva, or anus; (3) contact between the mouth and any body part where the staff has the intent to abuse, humiliate, arouse, or gratify sexual desire; (4) penetration of the anal or genital opening, however slight, by a hand, finger, object, or other instrument; (5) any other intentional contact, either directly or through clothing, of or with the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner thigh, or the buttocks where the staff has the intent to abuse, arouse, or gratify sexual desire; and (6) any attempt to engage in the activities described in paragraphs (1) through (5) of this definition. Sexual harassment. The term sexual harassment means acts conducted by staff on visitors, including (1) any unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, or verbal comments, gestures, or actions of a derogatory or offensive sexual nature; and (2) any verbal comments or gestures of a sexual nature, including demeaning references to gender, sexual orientation, sexually suggestive or derogatory comments about body or clothing, or obscene language or gestures. Staff. The term staff means anyone other than an incarcerated individual who is directly employed by the department. Visitor. The term visitor means any person who enters a city jail with the stated intention of visiting an incarcerated individual at any city jail, or any person who is screened by the department for visitation purposes, including but not limited to professionals and any person who registers to visit an incarcerated individual in the department's visitor tracking system. b. The commissioner shall post on the department website on a quarterly basis, within 30 days of the beginning of each quarter, a report containing information pertaining to the visitation of the incarcerated individual population in city jails for the prior quarter. Such quarterly report shall include the following information in total and disaggregated by whether the visitor is a professional, and also disaggregated by the type of services the professional provides: 1. The total number of visitors to city jails, the total number of visitors to borough jail facilities, and the total number of visitors to city jails on Rikers Island. 2. The total number of visitors that visited an incarcerated individual at city jails, the total number of visitors that visited an incarcerated individual at borough jail facilities, and the total number of visitors that visited an incarcerated individual at city jails on Rikers Island. 3. The number of visitors unable to visit an incarcerated individual at any city jail, in total and disaggregated by the reason such visit was not completed. 4. The incarcerated individual visitation rate, which shall be calculated by dividing the average daily number of visitors who visited incarcerated individuals at city jails during the reporting period by the average daily incarcerated individual population of city jails during the reporting period. 5. The borough jail facility visitation rate, which shall be calculated by dividing the average daily number of visitors who visited incarcerated individuals at borough jail facilities during the reporting period by the average daily incarcerated individual population of borough jail facilities during the reporting period. 6. The Rikers Island visitation rate, which shall be calculated by dividing the average daily number of visitors who visited incarcerated individuals at city jails on Rikers Island during the reporting period by the average daily incarcerated individual population of city jails on Rikers Island during the reporting period. c. Within 90 days of July 1, 2019, and every six months thereafter, the department shall submit to the speaker of the council and the board of correction a report of alleged incidents of sexual abuse, sexual harassment and interventions against visitors by staff that occurred during the preceding six month period for which an investigation lasted longer than 90 days, provided that the information required in paragraphs 7 through 16 need not be included in such reports until the report due within 90 days of July 1, 2021. The information required by this subdivision shall be reported in a format capable of automatic processing. Such report shall include the following information for each allegation of sexual abuse, sexual harassment and intervention: 1. The date on which the incident occurred and whether the incident took place between the times of 7:00 AM and 3:00 PM, 3:00 PM and 11:00 PM, or 11:00 PM and 7:00 AM; 2. Whether the incident occurred at Rikers Island or at a borough facility, and at which facility the incident occurred; 3. The method by which the incident was reported and the date of reporting; 4. Whether the alleged perpetrator completed staff training pursuant to subdivision f, and the last date such training was received; 5. The gender of the alleged victim; 6. Whether the alleged victim at the time of the incident was between the ages of 18-25, 26-35, 36-40, 41-60, over 60, or under 18; 7. Whether the alleged victim claimed that the perpetrator of the sexual abuse, sexual harassment or intervention intentionally selected them in whole or in part because of a belief or perception regarding the alleged victim's gender or sexual orientation, regardless of whether such belief or perception was correct; 8. Whether the alleged victim claimed that the perpetrator of the sexual abuse, sexual harassment or intervention intentionally committed the act in whole or in part because of a belief regarding the victim's gender or sexual orientation, regardless of whether such belief or perception was correct; 9. For interventions, whether emergency medical services was called; 10. The gender of the staff alleged to have engaged in sexual abuse, sexual harassment or an intervention against a visitor; 11. Whether the incident occurred in a restroom, a visitor's waiting area, or another location; 12. Whether the alleged victim is known to identify as transgender or intersex; 13. Whether the alleged victim is known to identify as lesbian, gay or bi-sexual; 14. The type of acts of sexual abuse or harassment as defined in subdivision a of this section; 15. For allegations of sexual abuse and harassment, whether such allegation consists of conduct consistent with the definition of sexual abuse or harassment under section 115.6 of title 28 of the code of federal regulations and any successor regulation; and 16. Whether the incident occurred during the course of an otherwise authorized search of the visitor. d. Within 90 days of July 1, 2019, and every six months thereafter, the department shall report to the speaker of the council and the board of correction a report of investigations of sexual abuse, sexual harassment and intervention against visitors by staff that were concluded during the preceding six-month period. Such report shall include the information set forth in paragraphs 1 through 16 of subdivision c of this section for each such concluded investigation of sexual abuse, sexual harassment and intervention; provided, however, that the information required in paragraphs 6 through 16 of subdivision c need not be included in such reports until the report due within 90 days of July 1, 2021. The information required by this subdivision shall be reported in a format capable of automatic processing. Reports made pursuant to this subdivision shall also include the following information for each such investigation: 1. Whether the department determined that the allegation was substantiated, unsubstantiated, or unfounded, and the date when such a determination was made; and 2. For substantiated allegations, whether the staff accused of sexual abuse, sexual harassment or intervention against a visitor resigned, retired, was suspended, placed on modified duty, placed on administrative leave or administered any other form of discipline, and whether criminal charges were brought. e. Within 90 days of July 1, 2019, and every six months thereafter, the department shall submit to the council and post on its website the information required in subdivisions c and d of this section in the aggregate, including the number and percentage of each data point, provided that such information that cannot be aggregated need not be included in such report. Such reports shall include the number of cases pending for over 90 days. Such reports shall be stored on the department's website for at least ten years. f. The department shall implement annual training regarding the treatment of visitors for staff who interact regularly with visitors. The department shall issue reports on such trainings, including descriptions of the training materials and the number of staff who have received the training. Such reports shall be submitted to the speaker of the council, the board of correction and posted on the department's website within 30 days of January 1 of each year. g. The department shall ensure that all data collected pursuant to this section is securely retained, and shall retain such data indefinitely after the date of initial collection unless federal or state law requires otherwise. h. The department shall report the information required pursuant to this subdivision notwithstanding any other provision of local law. Before making data collected pursuant to this section available to the speaker of the council, board of correction, and the public, the department shall remove an individual's name, all personal identifying information as defined by subdivision (a) of section 10-501, and any other information the disclosure of which would violate any federal or state laws. § 9-141 Menstrual products. a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Commissioner. The term “commissioner” means the commissioner of correction. Department. The term “department” means the department of correction. Menstrual cup. The term “menstrual cup” means a funnel-shaped or disc- shaped device made of either reusable or single-use material for use in connection with the menstrual cycle. b. Distribution of menstrual products. 1. All incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department who are in need of menstrual products shall be provided, at the department’s expense, with menstrual products as soon as practicable upon request. All individuals arrested and detained in the custody of the department for at least 48 hours who are in need of menstrual products shall be provided, at the department’s expense, with menstrual products as soon as practicable upon request. 2. The department shall provide a reusable menstrual cup, at the department’s expense, to any person who requests such cup upon release from the department’s custody. c. Reporting on provision of menstrual products. 1. No later than July 31, 2025, and annually thereafter, the commissioner shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council and post on the department’s website a report on the provision of menstrual products, as required by subdivision a of this section, during the preceding fiscal year. Such report shall include the following information: (a) The average daily population of individuals in the custody of the department, disaggregated by gender; (b) The number of such products ordered by the department during the preceding 12 months, disaggregated by product type; (c) The number of such products distributed to city correctional facilities during the preceding 12 months, disaggregated by product type; and (d) The number of such products distributed to individuals in the custody of the department during the preceding 12 months, disaggregated by product type. § 9-142 Rikers Island nursery procedures and report. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: Child. The term child means any person one year of age or younger whose mother is in the custody of the department. Nursery. The term nursery means any department facility designed to accommodate newborn children of incarcerated mothers, pursuant to New York state correctional law section 611 or any successor statute. Staff. The term staff means anyone, other than an incarcerated individual, working at a facility operated by the department. Use of force A. The term use of force A means a use of force by staff on an incarcerated individual resulting in an injury to staff or incarcerated individual that requires medical treatment beyond the prescription of over-the- counter analgesics or the administration of minor first aid, including those uses of force resulting in one or more of the following treatments/injuries: (i) multiple abrasions and/or contusions; (ii) chipped or cracked tooth; (iii) loss of tooth; (iv) laceration; (v) puncture; (vi) fracture; (vii) loss of consciousness; including a concussion; (viii) suture; (ix) internal injuries, including but not limited to, ruptured spleen or perforated eardrum; and (x) admission to a hospital. Use of force B. The term use of force B means a use of force by staff on an incarcerated individual resulting in an injury to staff or incarcerated individual that does not require hospitalization or medical treatment beyond the prescription of over-the-counter analgesics or the administration of minor first aid, including the following: (i) a use of force resulting in a superficial bruise, scrape, scratch, or minor swelling; and (ii) the forcible use of mechanical restraints in a confrontational situation that results in no or minor injury. Use of force C. The term use of force C means a use of force by staff on an incarcerated individual resulting in no injury to staff or incarcerated individual, including incidents where use of oleoresin capsicum spray results in no injury, beyond irritation that can be addressed through decontamination. b. Notice shall be given to all women admitted to any departmental facility that they may be eligible to be housed in the nursery with their child or children, if such child or children are one year of age or younger, and may be eligible to be housed in the nursery with their child after giving birth while in the custody of the department. Information about eligibility for the nursery shall be posted in the clinic. Such information and notice shall be provided in clear and simple language. c. Children and their mothers shall be housed in the nursery unless the department determines that such housing would not be in the best interest of such child pursuant to section 611 of the correction law or any successor statute. The department shall maintain formal written procedures consistent with this policy and with the following provisions: 1. The warden of the facility in which the nursery is located may deny a child admission to the nursery only if a consideration of all relevant evidence indicates that such admission would not be in the best interest of the child. 2. Any incarcerated individual whose child is denied admission to the nursery shall be provided with a written determination specifying the facts and reasons underlying such determination. Such notice shall indicate that this determination may be appealed, and describe the appeals process in plain and simple language. 3. An incarcerated individual may appeal such determination. The appeal shall be decided by the commissioner or the chief of the department, in consultation with a person who has expertise in early childhood development. Any denial of an appeal shall include a specific statement of the reasons for denial. A copy of this determination on the appeal shall be provided to such incarcerated individual. 4. Incarcerated individuals who are unable to read or understand the procedures in this subdivision shall be provided with necessary assistance. d. The department shall post on the department website by the 30th day of January on a yearly basis a report containing information pertaining to the department's nursery for the prior calendar year. Such annual report shall include: 1. The total number of children admitted to the nursery, and the average daily population of children in the nursery; 2. The total number applications submitted by mothers to bring their children into the nursery; 3. The total number of applications that were approved; 4. The total number of applications that were denied. For any children for whom such application was denied, the placement of such child in the following categories: (i) with a family member or guardian, (ii) with New York city administration for child services or any similar governmental agency, or (iii) any other placement; 5. The mean and median length of stay for children in the nursery annually, and for each occasion where a child was discharged, whether the stay was terminated because (i) their mothers were discharged from the custody of the department, (ii) the child reached an age at which they were no longer eligible to be housed at the nursery, or (iii) any other reason. For any child whose nursery stay was terminated for a reason other than their mother's discharge from the custody of the department, the placement of such child in the following categories: (i) with a family member or guardian, (ii) with New York city administration for child services or any similar governmental agency, or (iii) any other placement; 6. The programming and services available to incarcerated individuals and children in the nursery, including but not limited to the following categories: parenting, health and mental health, drug and/or alcohol addiction, vocational, educational, recreational, or other life skills; and 7. The following information by indicating the rate per 100 female incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department, disaggregated by whether or not the incident took place in the nursery: (i) incidents of use of force A, (ii) incidents of use of force B, (iii) incidents of use of force C, and (iv) incidents of use of force C in which chemical agents are used. e. The information in subdivision d of this section shall be compared to previous reporting periods, and shall be permanently accessible from the department's website. § 9-143 Annual report on mentally ill incarcerated individuals and recidivism. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Eligible incarcerated individual. The term eligible incarcerated individual means an incarcerated individual whose period of confinement in a city correctional facility lasts 24 hours or longer, and who, during such confinement, receives treatment for a mental illness, but does not include incarcerated individuals seen by mental health staff on no more than two occasions during their confinement and assessed on the latter of those occasions as having no need for further treatment in any city correctional facility or upon their release from any such facility. Reporting period. The term reporting period means the calendar year two years prior to the year in which the report issued pursuant to this section is issued. b. No later than March 31 of each year, beginning in 2017, the department shall post on its website a report regarding mentally ill incarcerated individuals and recidivism. Such report shall include but not be limited to the following information: 1. The number of incarcerated individuals released by the department to the community during the reporting period, the number of eligible incarcerated individuals released to the community by the department during the reporting period, and the percentage of incarcerated individuals released to the community by the department who were eligible during the reporting period, provided that such report shall count each individual released during the reporting period only once; and 2. The number and percentage of incarcerated individuals released to the community by the department during the reporting period who returned to the custody of the department within one year of their discharge, and the number and percentage of eligible incarcerated individuals released to the community by the department during the reporting period who returned to the custody of the department within one year of their discharge, provided that such report shall count each individual released during the reporting period only once. c. The information in subdivision b of this section shall be compared to previous reporting periods where such information is available, and shall be permanently accessible from the department's website. § 9-144 Correction programming evaluation and report. The department shall evaluate incarcerated individual programming each calendar year. For purposes of this section, incarcerated individual programming includes but is not limited to any structured services offered directly to incarcerated individuals for the purposes of vocational training, counseling, cognitive behavioral therapy, addressing drug dependencies, or any similar purpose. No later than April 1 of each year, beginning in 2017, the department shall submit a summary of each evaluation to the mayor and the council, and post such summary to the department's website. This summary shall include factors determined by the department, including, but not be limited to, information related to the following for each such program: (i) the amount of funding received; (ii) estimated number of incarcerated individuals served; (iii) a brief description of the program including the estimated number of hours of programming offered and utilized, program length, goals, target populations, effectiveness, and outcome measurements, where applicable; and (iv) successful completion and compliance rates, if applicable. Such summary shall be permanently accessible from the department's website and shall be provided in a format that permits automated processing, where appropriate. Each yearly summary shall include a comparison of the current year with the prior five years, where such information is available. § 9-145 Trauma-informed care. a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Correctional health services. The term correctional health services means the entity responsible for the delivery of health and mental health services to incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department. Staff. The term staff means any employee of the department or any person who regularly provides health or counseling services directly to incarcerated individuals. Trauma-informed care. The term trauma-informed care means trauma- informed care as described by the substance abuse and mental health services administration of the United States department of health and human services, or any successor agency, department, or governmental entity. b. Training. The department shall identify where trauma-informed care is appropriate and provide training for all appropriate staff on such care. Such training shall be consistent with standards developed by the substance abuse and mental health services administration of the United States department of health and human services. c. Usage. The department shall establish guidelines for the use of trauma- informed care consistent with standards developed by the substance abuse and mental health services administration of the United States department of health and human services. The department shall monitor staff to ensure that trauma- informed care is appropriately utilized in all city correctional facilities. d. Reporting. No later than 90 days from January 1 of each year, beginning in 2018, the department shall provide to the council and publish on its website an annual report regarding its use of trauma-informed care. Such report shall include but not be limited to information regarding the number of employees trained in such care, a description of the guidelines promulgated pursuant to subdivision c of this section, and any programing that utilizes trauma- informed care. Such report shall be stored permanently on the department's website and shall be provided in a format that permits automated processing where appropriate. Each report shall include a comparison of the current year to the prior five years, where such information is available. e. Transgender care. Correctional health services shall ensure that all medical and substance abuse professionals working with transgender individuals receive specialized training on transgender and gender-affirming care conducted by an individual or organization with expertise in the subject. § 9-146 Court appearance transportation for incarcerated individuals. a. By April 1, 2017 and upon gaining access to such database described in subdivision c of this section, the department shall, within 48 hours of admission of an incarcerated individual to the custody of the department, determine whether an incarcerated individual has any pending court appearances scheduled in New York city criminal court or the criminal term of New York state supreme court other than those appearances for cases for which such defendant is admitted to the custody of the department or that pertain solely to the payment of court surcharges. b. In complying with subdivision a of this section, the department shall: 1. notify the office of court administration that such incarcerated individual is in department custody upon determination of such court appearance, pursuant to subdivision a of this section; and 2. provide, as required by the court, transportation for every incarcerated individual for all such court appearances. c. The department shall make every effort to reach an agreement with the office of court administration to gain access by the department to a database maintained by the office of court administration related to court appearances scheduled in New York city criminal court or the criminal term of New York state supreme court. The requirements set forth in subdivisions a and b of this section shall apply only when the office of court administration reaches such agreement with the department. d. The department shall record, via body-worn or handheld camera, video, including audio, every interaction between incarcerated individuals and correction officers in which an incarcerated individual is informed about a scheduled court appearance and shall maintain a database with the video files created pursuant to this subdivision. All video recordings shall include the department informing an incarcerated individual that they have a court appearance, that they have the right to attend their court appearance, and the entirety of any response by the incarcerated individual or departmental intervention taken to gain compliance. e. If consent is provided to the department by an incarcerated individual, the department shall provide, within 3 business days to the defense attorney on record of such incarcerated individual, the video file of an interaction in which that incarcerated individual is informed that they have a court appearance and the entirety of any response by the incarcerated individual or departmental intervention taken to gain compliance, unless otherwise prohibited by law. f. The department shall independently establish, or establish by working with the office of court administration, a means by which real-time information regarding an incarcerated individual’s departure from their housing facility on the date of their scheduled court appearance can be communicated to the defense attorney on record of such incarcerated individual and, if necessary, the department shall make available a telephone number where such information can be obtained. g. No later than 30 days after the effective date of the local law that added this section, and monthly thereafter, the commissioner, in consultation with the relevant agencies, shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council and shall post conspicuously on the department’s website data on court production. Such data must include the total number of court production videos stored in the department’s database and the total number of court production videos provided to defense counsel pursuant to subdivision e. The data must also include the number of scheduled court appearances for incarcerated individuals in a court facility, as well as virtual court appearances. This data shall be further disaggregated by: 1. The total number of scheduled court appearances, disaggregated by housing facility and venue of the scheduled court appearance; 2. The total number of individuals that were delivered to the court facility on the date of their scheduled court appearance, disaggregated by housing facility and venue of the scheduled court appearance; 3. The total number of individuals who were not delivered to the court facility on the date of their court appearance disaggregated by housing facility and venue of the scheduled court appearance, and the reason the individual was not delivered to the court facility; 4. The total number of individuals with an on-site court appearance that were delivered to the court facility before 10:00 a.m. on the day of their scheduled court appearance, disaggregated by venue of the scheduled court appearance; 5. The total number of individuals with an on-site court appearance that were delivered to the court facility between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on the day of their scheduled court appearance, disaggregated by venue of the scheduled court appearance; 6. The total number of individuals with an on-site court appearance that were delivered to the court facility after 12:00 p.m. on the day of their scheduled court appearance, disaggregated by venue of the scheduled court appearance; 7. The total number of individuals for which use of force was required to compel the individual to be delivered to the court facility on the date of their scheduled court appearance, disaggregated by housing facility. § 9-147 Court appearance clothing for incarcerated individuals. Except as provided elsewhere in this section, the department shall provide every incarcerated individual appearing for a trial or before a grand jury with access to clothing in their personal property prior to transport for such appearance, and produce all such incarcerated individuals for such appearances in such clothing. If such clothing is not available, or if an incarcerated individual chooses not to wear their personal clothing, the department shall provide such incarcerated individual with new or gently used, size appropriate clothing of a kind customarily worn by persons not in the custody of the department, unless (i) such incarcerated individual chooses to wear the uniform issued by the department, or (ii) such incarcerated individual is required to wear such uniform by an order of the court. The department shall permit personal clothing to be delivered to an incarcerated individual during such time as packages are permitted to be delivered under title 40 of the rules of the city of New York or during reasonable hours the day before an incarcerated individual's scheduled appearance for a trial or before a grand jury. New or gently used, weather- and size-appropriate clothing of a kind customarily worn by persons not in the custody of the department shall be offered to any incarcerated individual released from the custody of the department from a court, unless the incarcerated individual is wearing the incarcerated individual's own personal clothing. § 9-148 Bail payments and processing. a. The department shall accept cash bail payments immediately and continuously after an incarcerated individual is admitted to the custody of the department, except on such dates on which an incarcerated individual appears in court other than an arraignment in criminal court. b. The department shall release any incarcerated individual for whom bail or bond has been paid or posted within the required time period of the later of such payment being made or the department's receipt of notice thereof, provided that if an incarcerated individual cannot be released within the required time period due to extreme and unusual circumstances then such incarcerated individual shall be released as soon as possible. Such timeframe may be extended when any of the following occurs, provided that the incarcerated individual's release shall be forthwith as that term is used in section 520.15 of the criminal procedure law: 1. The incarcerated individual receives discharge planning services prior to release; 2. The incarcerated individual has a warrant or hold from another jurisdiction or agency; 3. The incarcerated individual is being transported at the time bail or bond is paid or posted; 4. The incarcerated individual is not in departmental custody at the time bail or bond is paid or posted; 5. The incarcerated individual requires immediate medical or mental health treatment; or 6. Section 520.30 of the criminal procedure law necessitates a delay. c. The department shall accept or facilitate the acceptance of cash bail payments for incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department: (i) at any courthouse of the New York City Criminal Court, (ii) at any location within one half mile of any such courthouse during all operating hours of such courthouse and at least two hours subsequent to such courthouse's closing, or (iii) online. d. For the purposes of subdivision b, the term required time period means five hours beginning on October 1, 2017, four hours beginning on April 1, 2018, and three hours beginning on October 1, 2018. e. 1. No fee may be assessed on an online payment of bail, unless the chief administrator of the courts requires a party making a payment of bail to pay a reasonable administrative fee. 2. No fee may be assessed on an in person payment of bail, unless the chief administrator of the courts requires a party making a payment of bail to pay a reasonable administrative fee. § 9-149 Admission delays. a. In order to facilitate the posting of bail, the department may delay the transportation of an incarcerated individual for admission to a housing facility for not less than four and not more than 12 hours following the incarcerated individual's arraignment in criminal court if requested by either the department or a not-for-profit corporation under contract with the city to provide pretrial and other criminal justice services, including interviewing adult defendants either before or after such persons are arraigned on criminal charges, has made direct contact with a person who reports that he or she will post bail for the incarcerated individual. b. Such delay is not permissible for any incarcerated individual who: 1. Appears or claims to have a health or mental health condition that requires attention during the time period of such delay, notwithstanding the requirements of title 8 of this code; 2. Appears to be physically incapacitated due to drug or alcohol intoxication; 3. Requests medical attention or appears to require immediate medical attention; 4. Has bail set in an amount of 10,000 dollars or more; or 5. States, upon being informed of the delay permissible pursuant to this section, that he or she will not be able to post bail within 12 hours or otherwise indicates that they do not wish to be subject to such delay. c. This section does not require the department to exceed the lawful capacity of any structure or unit, or require the department to detain incarcerated individuals in courthouse facilities during such times as correctional staff are not regularly scheduled to detain incarcerated individuals provided that the department must provide for the regular staffing of courthouse facilities for at least one hour after the last incarcerated individual was taken into custody on bail. d. Beginning July 1, 2018, the department or its designee shall submit to the council an annual report regarding the implementation of subdivisions a and b of this section. Such report shall include the following information: 1. The locations in which the department has implemented the provisions of this section; 2. In such locations, the number of incarcerated individuals whose admission to a housing facility was delayed pursuant to this section; 3. The number and percentage of such incarcerated individuals who posted bail during such delay and the number and percentage of such incarcerated individuals who posted bail during the two calendar days following such incarcerated individuals' arraignment; and 4. The number of incarcerated individuals whose admission to a housing facility was delayed and who required medical treatment during such period of delay. § 9-150 Bail facilitation. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Bail facilitator. The term bail facilitator means a person or persons whose duties include explaining to eligible incarcerated individuals how to post bail or bond, explaining the fees that may be collected by bail bonds companies, taking reasonable steps to communicate directly with or facilitate such individual's communication with possible sureties, and taking any other reasonable measures to assist such individuals in posting bail or bond. Eligible incarcerated individual. The term eligible incarcerated individual means a person in the custody of the department held only on bail or bond. Institutional defense provider. The term institutional defense provider means any private institutional legal services organization selected in accordance with section 13-02 of title 43 of the rules of the city of New York to represent indigent persons, or any successor provision thereto. a. Within 24 hours of taking custody of an eligible incarcerated individual, the department shall provide to such individual the following information in written form: (i) the individual's amount of bail or bond, (ii) the individual's New York state identification number or booking and case number or other unique identifying number, (iii) options for all forms of bail payment and all steps required for such payment, including the locations at which a surety may post bail and the requirements for so posting, and (iv) any other information relevant to assisting the individual in posting bail or bond. b. Within 24 hours of taking custody of eligible incarcerated individuals, the department shall notify such individuals that they may post their own bail. Within such time period, the department shall, to the extent practicable and in a manner consistent with officer safety and all applicable laws, offer such individuals the opportunity to obtain property, including personal contact information and financial resources, that such individuals may require for the purpose of posting bail and which is stored in such individual's personal property, provided that any member of the department who accesses such individual's property pursuant to this subdivision shall request access only for the purpose of facilitating posting bail. c. The department shall ensure that bail facilitators meet with all eligible incarcerated individuals within 48 hours of their admission to the custody of the department, that eligible incarcerated individuals have continued access to bail facilitators, and that bail facilitators are provided with reasonable resources necessary to fulfill their duties. d. Absent unusual circumstances, the following time periods shall apply to notifications given pursuant to this subdivision to eligible incarcerated individuals and their legal representatives: the department shall generate a list of eligible incarcerated individuals who are held solely due to a bail amount of less than $10 once before noon and once after noon every day of the week. Within three hours of generation of such a list, but no later than 24 hours after receipt of information from the office of court administration regarding the bail status of eligible incarcerated individuals, the department shall provide each eligible incarcerated individual who is held solely due to a bail amount of less than $10 with notice that such eligible incarcerated individual is held solely due to a bail amount of less than $10. Within ninety minutes of generation of such a list, the department shall consult a website maintained by the New York state unified court system that may contain information relating to such individual's legal representative. If such website identifies the legal representative of such individual and contains a telephone number for such legal representative, the department shall telephone such legal representative to inform them that such individual is held solely due to a bail amount of less than $10. If such website identifies an institutional defense provider as the legal representative of such individual, the department shall telephone or email such institutional defense provider within ninety minutes of generation of such a list to inform them that such individual is held solely due to a bail amount of less than $10, regardless of whether a telephone number or email address is identified on a website maintained by the New York state unified court system. § 9-151 Rikers Island education report. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: Adolescent. The term adolescent means any individual in the custody of the department who is 16 or 17 years old. Assault. The term assault means any action taken with intent to cause physical injury to another person. Department of education site. The term department of education site means any facility operated by the department of education that offers educational programming to incarcerated individuals, including but not limited to adolescents, and that is located on property under the control of the department of correction. Department of education staff. The term department of education staff means any employee of the department of education assigned to work in a department of education site. Educational programming. The term educational programming means any educational services offered to incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department of correction by the department of education. High school equivalency diploma test. The term high school equivalency diplomacy test means any test offered by the New York state education department for the purpose of establishing the equivalent of a high school diploma, including, but not limited to, a general education development test or the test assessing secondary completion. Individualized educational plan. The term individualized educational plan has the same meaning as is set forth in paragraph (1) of subsection (d) section 1414 of title 20 of the United States code and any regulations promulgated thereto. Staff. The term staff means department of correction uniformed staff. Use of force A. The term use of force A means a use of force by staff on an incarcerated individual resulting in an injury that requires medical treatment beyond the prescription of over-the-counter analgesics or the administration of minor first aid, including those uses of force resulting in one or more of the following treatments/injuries: (i) multiple abrasions and/or contusions; (ii) chipped or cracked tooth; (iii) loss of tooth; (iv) laceration; (v) puncture; (vi) fracture; (vii) loss of consciousness; including a concussion; (viii) suture; (ix) internal injuries, including but not limited to, ruptured spleen or perforated eardrum; and (x) admission to a hospital. Use of force B. The term use of force B means a use of force by staff on an incarcerated individual which does not require hospitalization or medical treatment beyond the prescription of over-the-counter analgesics or the administration of minor first aid, including the following: (i) a use of force resulting in a superficial bruise, scrape, scratch, or minor swelling; and (ii) the forcible use of mechanical restraints in a confrontational situation that results in no or minor injury. Use of force C. The term use of force C means a use of force by staff on an incarcerated individual resulting in no injury to staff or an incarcerated individual, including incidents where use of oleoresin capsicum spray results in no injury, beyond irritation that can be addressed through decontamination. Young adult. The term young adult means any individual in the custody of the department who is 18, 19, 20 or 21 years old. b. As set forth below, the department of education and the department of correction shall produce annual reports on educational programming in department of education sites. Beginning no later than 90 days after the final day of the 2017-2018 school year, and no later than 90 days after each subsequent school year, each such department shall post the reports on its website, and provide a link in each such report to the report of the other department. c. The department of education report shall include, but need not be limited to, the following information, provided that no information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy of student information or that would interfere with law enforcement investigations or otherwise conflict with the interests of law enforcement. If a category contains between 1 and 5 students, or allows another category to be narrowed to between 1 and 5 students, the number shall be replaced with a symbol. The student age as of the final day of school enrollment or attendance will be used to categorize the student as an adolescent or young adult, for the purposes of this reporting. 1. The number of adolescents enrolled in educational programming. 2. The number of young adults enrolled in educational programming, and the percentage of such young adults so enrolled. Such percentage shall be calculated by averaging the number of young adults so enrolled on the final school day of each month divided by the number of young adults in the custody of the department of correction on such date. 3. The number of hours of compulsory educational programming afforded to adolescents on each school day, and an identification of the curriculum subject areas included in educational programming. 4. The number of hours of educational programming afforded to young adults on each school day, and an identification of the curriculum subject areas included in educational programming. 5. The number of adolescents and young adults whose educational programming is designed for the regents diploma and the number of adolescents whose educational programming is designed for a high school equivalency diploma test. 6. The number of 17-year-old adolescents who graduated from high school, and the number of young adults enrolled in educational programming who graduated from high school. 7. The number of 17-year-old adolescents to whom a high school equivalency diploma test was administered, and the number of young adults to whom a high school equivalency diploma test was administered. 8. The number of 17-year-old adolescents who passed a high school equivalency diploma test, and the number of young adults who passed a high school equivalency diploma test. 9. The functional levels of adolescents and young adults on tests such as the test of basic adult education or similar testing. The functional level may be calculated per the last test administered to the student each school year. 10. The number of incarcerated individuals enrolled in department of education sites, disaggregated by age. 11. The number and percentage of adolescents and young adults who are enrolled in educational programming for whom individualized education plans have been developed by the department of education. Such percentage shall be calculated by averaging the number of adolescents and young adults so enrolled on the final school day of each month divided by the respective number of adolescents and young adults in the custody of the department of correction on such date 12. The number of adolescents and young adults who have individualized educational plans and who are receiving special education services. 13. The number and percentage of adolescents and young adults enrolled in educational programming who are identified by the department of education as English language learner status as defined by the department of education. Such percentage shall be calculated by averaging the number of adolescents and young adults so enrolled on the final school day of each month divided by the respective number of adolescents and young adults in the custody of the department of correction on such date. 14. The numbers of teachers working at department of education sites, in total and disaggregated by those assigned to teach adolescents and young adults. 15. The number of department of education staff other than teachers assigned to work at department of education sites, in total and disaggregated by those working with adolescents and young adults. 16. The average class size for educational programming provided to adolescents by the department of education. 17. The number of adolescents participating in department of education vocational educational programming, the nature of such programming, and the number of such adolescents who complete such programming. 18. The number young adults enrolled in educational programming who are participating in department of education vocational educational programming, the nature of such programming, and the number of such young adults who complete such programming. 19. The average and median number of credits accumulated by adolescents enrolled in high school educational programming, and the average and median number of credits accumulated by young adults enrolled in high school educational programming. This paragraph shall only apply to those adolescents and young adults who had been in custody for a sufficient period during the reporting period to have earned credits, and the information in this paragraph shall be listed in total and by dividing the number of credits accumulated by the number of such adolescents and young adults. 20. The average and median rate of attendance in a department of education school for adolescent and young adults, upon their release from the custody of the department at six months and one year post-release. 21. The number of adolescents enrolled in physical education at department of education sites. 22. The number of unique assaults on department of education staff by incarcerated individuals. d. The department of correction report shall include, but need not be limited to, the following information, which shall be produced in a format that protects the privacy interests of incarcerated individuals, including but not limited to those who have juvenile records and sealed criminal records or are otherwise protected by state or federal law. The student age as of the incident date will be used to categorize the student as adolescent or young adult, for the purposes of this reporting. 1. The number of departmental infractions issued to adolescents at a department of education site, and the number of departmental infractions issued to young adults at a department of education school site, in total and disaggregated by the type of infraction, as defined by the department. 2. The number of students prevented from attending educational programming by the department of correction because of a behavioral issue or an assault. 3. The number of assaults on staff at a department of education site, in total and disaggregated by whether such assault was committed by an adolescent or young adult. 4. The number of incidents of use of force A at a department of education site, in total and disaggregated by whether such use of force was used on an adolescent or young adult. 5. The number of incidents of use of force B at a department of education site, in total and disaggregated by whether such use of force was used on an adolescent or young adult. 6. The number of incidents of use of force C at a department of education site, in total and disaggregated by whether such use of force was used on an adolescent or young adult. e. The report by the department of education shall include a report on plans, if any, to ensure the educational progress of students released from the custody of the department of correction. § 9-152 Report on use of force investigations. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Formal proceeding. The term formal proceeding means any formal proceeding before a tribunal, administrative judge, or other adjudicative body outside the department to adjudicate a disciplinary action pursuant to section 75 of the civil service law, including but not limited to proceedings before the New York city office of administrative trials and hearings. Incident. The term incident means any incident in which staff used force on an incarcerated individual. Staff. The term staff means any department of correction uniformed staff. b. Beginning August 31, 2018, and every year thereafter, the commissioner shall prepare a report on investigations into incidents for the previous fiscal year. This report shall be sent to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and posted on the department's website. This report shall include, but need not be limited to, the following information: 1. The number and rate in which the department investigated incidents. 2. The number and rate of incidents for which the department determined that staff violated a departmental rule or was otherwise subject to discipline, the type of incident that occurred, and the type of discipline recommended and actually imposed for such incidents. 3. To the extent applicable, information regarding the entities within the department that are responsible for conducting investigations into incidents, including the number, rate and speed at which such entities conduct and complete investigations. 4. To the extent applicable, the number of formal proceedings that occurred, and the outcomes of such proceedings. In any case in which the outcome of a formal proceeding was a recommendation to the commissioner for a certain type of sanction, the report shall include whether the recommended sanction was accepted, rejected or modified. 5. The number of investigations into incidents that were referred to a district attorney's office, the department of investigation, or any similar law enforcement entity. c. No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy of information or that would interfere with law enforcement investigations. § 9-153 Erroneous records. The department shall make best efforts to provide records relating to an individual's period of incarceration necessary to rectify erroneous warrants within three business days of the request for such records. § 9-154 Telephone services to incarcerated individuals. The city shall provide telephone services to individuals within the custody of the department in city correctional facilities at no cost to the individuals or the receiving parties for domestic telephone calls. The city shall not be authorized to receive or retain any revenue for providing telephone services. § 9-155 Emergency lock-in report. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Continuous lock-in. The term continuous lock-in means any period of time in which incarcerated individuals are confined to their cells or beds due to the combination of an emergency lock-in and either a scheduled lock-in or a lock-in extension, or both. Department-wide emergency lock-in. The term department-wide emergency lock-in means any period of time during which incarcerated individuals are confined to their cells or beds throughout all department facilities, but shall not include any scheduled period of lock-in. Facility emergency lock-in. The term facility emergency lock-in means any period of time during which incarcerated individuals are confined to their cells or beds within all housing areas of an individual departmental facility, but shall not include any scheduled period of lock-in. Housing area emergency lock-in. The term housing area emergency lock-in means any period of time during which incarcerated individuals within an individual housing area within a facility are confined to their cells or beds, but shall not include any scheduled period of lock-in. Lock-in extension. The term lock-in extension means when a scheduled period of lock-in is extended. Mandated services. The term mandated services means incarcerated individual services required to be provided pursuant to local law or rule, including but not limited to access to: law library, recreation, religious services, sick call, visits, and educational services. Partial facility emergency lock-in. The term partial facility emergency lock-in means any period of time during which incarcerated individuals are confined to their cells or beds within a segment of an individual departmental facility, but shall not include any scheduled period of lock-in. Any emergency lock-in that includes periods of full facility emergency lock-in and partial facility emergency lock-in shall be considered a full facility emergency lock- in. Scheduled period of lock-in. The term scheduled period of lock-in means (1) during the evening, for an incarcerated individual count or for sleeping time, a period not to exceed 8 hours within any 24-hour period, (2) during the day, for an incarcerated individual count or for required facility business that can only be carried out when incarcerated individuals are locked in, a period not to exceed 2 hours within any 24-hour period, and (3) for any other period of regularly scheduled lock-in permitted by applicable law or board of correction rules pertaining to specialized housing areas. Nothing in this section invalidates or affects existing or future laws or board of correction rules regarding the extension of a scheduled period of lock-in. b. Sixty days after the end of the quarter beginning April 1, 2019, and no later than the sixtieth day after the end of each subsequent quarter, the department shall post on its website a report containing information pertaining to emergency lock-ins that occurred during the preceding quarter. All data shall be submitted in a machine readable format. Such report shall include: 1. the number of department-wide emergency lock-ins, in total and disaggregated by the reason for such emergency lock-in, as determined by the department; 2. the number of facility emergency lock-ins disaggregated by facility, in total and disaggregated by the reason for such emergency lock-in, as determined by the department; 3. the number of lock-in extensions disaggregated by facility and housing area, in total and disaggregated by housing area type and reason for lock-in extension; 4. the number of partial facility emergency lock-ins disaggregated by facility, in total and disaggregated by the reason for such emergency lock-in, as determined by the department; 5. the number of housing area emergency lock-ins disaggregated by facility and housing area, in total and disaggregated by the reason for such emergency lock-in, as determined by the department, and the housing area type; 6. the mean and median number of incarcerated individuals housed in areas affected by housing area emergency lock-ins disaggregated by facility, in total and disaggregated by the housing area type; 7. the mean and median duration of emergency lock-ins disaggregated by department-wide emergency lock-ins, in total and disaggregated by the reason for such emergency lock-in, as determined by the department; facility emergency lock-ins, in total and disaggregated by the reason for such emergency lock-in, as determined by the department; partial facility emergency lock-ins, in total and disaggregated by the reason for such emergency lock-in, as determined by the department; and housing area emergency lock-ins disaggregated by facility, in total and disaggregated by the reason for such emergency lock-in, as determined by the department, and housing area type; 8. the number of times mandated services are affected by an emergency lock-in or lock in extension, disaggregated by service type; 9. the mean and median duration of continuous lock-ins disaggregated by facility, in total and disaggregated by the reason for such emergency lock-in, as determined by the department, and the housing area type; and 10. the number of times that the duration of a continuous lock-in exceeds 24 hours, disaggregated by facility, in total and disaggregated by the reason for such emergency lock-in, as determined by the department, and the housing area type. c. Sixty days after January 1, 2020, and no later than the sixtieth day after the end of each subsequent year, the department shall post on its website a report containing the information from paragraphs 1 through 10 of subdivision b of this section for the preceding year. All data shall be submitted in a machine readable format. d. The information required by subdivisions b and c of this section shall be compared to the previous four reporting periods, and stored permanently, and accessible from the department's website. § 9-156 Sexual abuse reporting. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Correctional health authority. The term correctional health authority means the entity responsible for the delivery of health and mental health services to incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department. Facility investigation. The term facility investigation means any investigation of an incident conducted by staff within a departmental facility but does not include an investigation conducted by the investigation division. Gender non-conforming. The term gender non-conforming describes a person who presents in a way that does not conform with traditional gender expectations. Investigation division. The term investigation division means any departmental unit responsible for investigating allegations of staff misconduct. Non-binary. The term non-binary describes a person who does not identify as male or female. Sexual abuse. The term sexual abuse includes sexual abuse of an incarcerated individual by staff or sexual abuse by an incarcerated individual. Sexual abuse by staff of an incarcerated individual. The term sexual abuse by staff includes any of the following acts conducted by staff, with or without consent of the incarcerated individual, including when such acts occur during the course of an otherwise authorized search procedure: (1) contact between the penis and the vulva or the penis and the anus, including penetration, however slight; (2) contact between the mouth and the penis, vulva, or anus; (3) contact between the mouth and any body part where the staff member has the intent to abuse, arouse, or gratify sexual desire; (4) penetration of the anal or genital opening, however slight, by a hand, finger, object, or other instrument; (5) any other intentional contact, either directly or through the clothing, of or with the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner thigh, or the buttocks where the staff member has the intent to abuse, arouse, or gratify sexual desire; and (6) any attempt to engage in the acts described in paragraphs (1) through (5) of this definition. Sexual abuse by an incarcerated individual. The term sexual abuse by an incarcerated individual includes any of the following acts if the victim and perpetrator are both incarcerated individuals, and if the victim does not consent, is coerced into such act by overt or implied threats of violence, or is unable to consent or refuse: (1) contact between the penis and the vulva or the penis and the anus, including penetration, however slight; (2) contact between the mouth and the penis, vulva, or anus; (3) penetration of the anal or genital opening of another person, however slight, by a hand, finger, object, or other instrument; and (4) any other intentional touching, either directly or through the clothing, of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner thigh, or the buttocks of another person, excluding contact incidental to a physical altercation. Sexual harassment. The term sexual harassment includes (1) any unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, or verbal comments, gestures, or actions of a derogatory or offensive sexual nature; and (2) any verbal comments or gestures of a sexual nature, including demeaning references to gender, sexually suggestive or derogatory comments about body or clothing, or obscene language or gestures. Staff. The term staff means an employee who works directly for the department. b. Within 90 days of July 1, 2019 and every six months thereafter, the department shall provide to the speaker of the council and the board of correction a report of alleged incidents of sexual abuse and sexual harassment for which an investigation lasted longer than 90 days that occurred during the preceding six-month period, provided that the information required in paragraphs 14 through 25 of this subdivision need not be included in such reports until the report due within 90 days of July 1, 2021. All data shall be reported in a format capable of automated processing. Such report shall include the following information for each allegation of sexual abuse and sexual harassment: 1. The date on which the incident occurred and whether the incident took place between the times of 7:00 AM and 3:00 PM, 3:00 PM and 11:00 PM, and 11:00 PM and 7:00 AM; 2. Whether the allegation is of sexual abuse or sexual harassment as defined in subdivision a of this section; 3. The date the incident was reported and an investigation was opened; 4. The gender of the alleged victim; 5. Whether the alleged victim at the time of the incident was between the ages of 18-25, 26-35, 36-40, 41-60, over 60, or under 18 when such individuals are in department custody; 6. The race and ethnic origin of the alleged victim; 7. Whether the alleged victim had been in custody for more than 24 hours and who, during such confinement, received treatment for a mental illness, not including incarcerated individuals seen by mental health staff on no more than two occasions during their confinement and assessed on the latter of those occasions as having no need for further treatment in any city correctional facility or upon their release from any such facility; 8. The gender of the alleged perpetrator; 9. Whether the alleged perpetrator was an incarcerated individual or staff; 10. If the alleged perpetrator was staff, the number of previous allegations against the staff that were substantiated and the outcome of each investigation; 11. If the alleged perpetrator was staff, the number of previous allegations against such staff that were unsubstantiated; 12. If the alleged perpetrator was staff, the number of previous allegations against such staff which are still pending; 13. The facility in which the incident occurred; 14. Whether the incident occurred in a service area or housing area; 15. If the incident occurred in a housing area, the housing area type; 16. Whether video camera surveillance recorded the incident; 17. The type of sexual abuse or harassment as defined in subdivision a of this section; 18. Whether the alleged victim is known to identify as transgender or intersex; 19. Whether the alleged victim is known to identify as non-binary or gender non-conforming; 20. Whether the alleged victim is known to identify as lesbian, gay or bi-sexual; 21. Whether DNA or any other physical evidence was obtained; 22. Whether a rape kit was administered, declined or not applicable; 23. If a rape kit was deemed not applicable, whether that determination was the result of a delay in reporting, due to the type of abuse alleged to have occurred, or any other reason; 24. Whether a sexual assault nurse examiner or sexual assault response team was present during the administration of a rape kit; and 25. Whether the case was referred to the department of investigation, the date of such referral, and whether the department of investigation referred it back to the department of correction to investigate. c. Within 90 days of July 1, 2019, and every six months thereafter, the department shall report to the council and the board of correction a report of investigations of allegations of sexual abuse and sexual harassment that concluded during the preceding six-month period, provided that the information required in paragraphs 14 through 25 of subdivision b and paragraphs 8 through 11 of this subdivision need not be included in such reports until the report due within 90 days of July 1, 2021. All data shall be reported in a format capable of automated processing. Such report shall include the following information in addition to the information in paragraphs 1 through 25 of subdivision b of this section: 1. The date the investigation was opened and closed; 2. Whether the department determined that the incident was substantiated, unsubstantiated, or unfounded; 3. Whether the allegation was referred to a district attorney's office and whether that district attorney's office declined to prosecute, and whether the alleged perpetrator was convicted during the reporting period; 4. Whether the investigation was conducted by the facility or by the investigation division; 5. Where an investigation was referred to the investigation division, the reason for such referral; 6. Whether the investigation was referred back from the investigative division to the department facility and the reason for such referral; 7. Whether the alleged victim was notified regarding the outcome of the investigation; 8. Whether the alleged victim was referred to trauma or rape crisis services following the incident and if the victim accepted or declined such services while in custody; 9. Whether the alleged perpetrator and alleged victim were separated from physical contact during pendency of the investigation; 10. For substantiated allegations, if the perpetrator was a staff person, whether during the pendency of the investigation such staff person resigned, was suspended, placed on modified duty, assigned to a post without contact with incarcerated individuals, assigned to a post with restricted contact with incarcerated individuals, placed on administrative leave, or administered any other form of discipline; 11. For substantiated allegations, whether the allegation was referred for disciplinary action, including whether the department declined to file disciplinary charges, or if disciplinary charges were filed, the outcome of such disciplinary proceeding and whether the alleged staff perpetrator resigned or retired in lieu of charges or as part of a negotiated plea. d. Within 90 days of July 1, 2019, and every six months thereafter, the department shall post on its website the information required in subdivisions b and c of this section in the aggregate, including the number and percentage of each data point, provided that such information that cannot be aggregated need not be included in such report. Such aggregated reports shall include the number of cases pending for over 90 days. Such reports shall be stored on the department's website for at least ten years. e. Unless otherwise precluded by law, the correctional health authority shall assist the department in collecting the data enumerated in subdivisions b and c of this section. f. The department shall review this incident data in order to assess and improve the effectiveness of its sexual abuse and sexual harassment prevention, detection, and response policies, practices, and training by identifying problem areas and trends, taking corrective action on an ongoing basis and providing a semiannual assessment report to the council on its findings and corrective actions for each facility, as well as the department as a whole. Such semiannual assessment report shall also review the need for policy and practice changes, assess whether vulnerable populations are particularly at risk and review whether staffing levels are adequate, whether investigation practices need to be revised and whether monitoring technology needs to be deployed or improved. Such semiannual assessment report shall include a comparison of the current six months' data and corrective actions with those from the prior six months and shall provide an assessment of the department's progress in addressing sexual abuse and sexual harassment. Such a report shall be provided to the public and to the speaker of the council within 90 days following the end of each reporting period starting on July 1, 2019 and every six months thereafter. g. The department shall ensure that all data collected pursuant to this section is securely retained, and shall retain such data indefinitely after the date of the initial collection unless federal or state law requires otherwise. h. The department shall report the information required pursuant to this subdivision notwithstanding any other provision of local law. Before making data collected pursuant to this section available to the speaker of the council, board of correction, and the public, the department shall remove an individual's name, all personal identifying information as defined by subdivision (a) of section 10-501, and any other information the disclosure of which would violate any federal or state laws. § 9-157 Housing requests related to gender identity. a. On or before January 1, 2020, the department shall issue an incident level report to the speaker of the council and the board of correction on applications for housing in dedicated housing units that includes transgender, gender non-binary, and intersex individuals made during the six-month period preceding the date of issuance of such report. Such report shall include the following information for each such application: the outcome of such request; the length of time between such application and a decision on such application; if such request was denied, the reason for such denial in categories defined by the department; if an appeal was filed, the outcome of such appeal and the length of time between the filing of such appeal and the response to such appeal. Before submitting such reports, the department shall remove all personal identifiers. Any individually identifiable information contained in such reports shall not be publicly disclosed except as required by law or with the written consent of the person who is the subject of the information, or that person's authorized representative. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the reports required by this subdivision are not required to be transmitted in electronic format to the department of records and information services, or its successor agency, and are not required to be made available to the public on or through the department of records and information services' web site, or its successor's web site. b. On or before January 1, 2020, the department shall publish on its website a report on applications for housing in a dedicated housing unit that includes transgender, gender non-binary, and intersex individuals made during the six-month period preceding the date of issuance of such report. Such report shall include the number of such applications, the number of such applications that were granted, and the number of applications denied, the number of such applications that were appealed, and the outcomes of such appeals. Such report shall be submitted in a machine readable format, compared to the previous four reporting periods, and stored permanently on the department's website. § 9-158 Mental health treatment for transgender, gender nonconforming, non- binary, and intersex individuals. The department shall ensure that any housing unit where transgender, gender nonconforming, non-binary, and intersex individuals are housed has access to the same mental health treatment as units housing other incarcerated individuals. § 9-159 Guiding principles for new correctional facilities. a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Dormitory. The term dormitory means a unit which houses multiple individuals. This term shall have the same meaning as the term multiple occupancy housing unit. Housing unit. The term housing unit means a structure or part of a structure that contains single occupancy housing units or multiple occupancy housing units, as those terms are defined in the rules of the New York state commission of correction. Living quarters. The term living quarters means an individual occupancy housing unit as defined in section 7040.4 of title 9 of the compilation of codes, rules and regulations of the state of New York or any successor provision. Kitchenette. The term kitchenette means a space equipped to be used for heating food and water. b. Every city correctional facility under the sole jurisdiction and control of the department built after the effective date of the local law that added this section shall comply with the following requirements: 1. Design requirements. Each such facility shall be designed, where practicable, in a manner that deprioritizes an institutional appearance and the use of bars. 2. General requirements. Each such facility shall include: (a) a call button or telephone in each room that incarcerated individuals may use to contact staff; (b) infrastructure that provides internet capability, subject to security and safety protocols of the department; (c) designated spaces for re-entry services and programming, with sufficient space and infrastructure to accomplish the purposes of the services offered therein; (d) access to clinical space for each housing unit, with 24 hour access to emergency response; (e) systems that provide heating and air conditioning; (f) visiting spaces, waiting areas, and other spaces in which visitors frequent that include an area that is suitable for children; and (g) an outdoor recreation area. 3. Individual living quarters. Each individual living quarter in such facility shall: (a) be no less than 75 square feet (6.97 square meters) in total area and no less than six feet (1.83 meters) in any direction; (b) contain a functioning toilet, sink with potable water, single bed, and a closeable storage container for personal property for a single person; (c) have at least one window with access to natural light. The total area of all windows in each living quarter shall be a least one-tenth the floor area of such room; (d) contain no more than one single bed and house no more than one person; and (e) contain at least one light that can be turned on and off. 4. Dormitories. Each dormitory in such facility shall: (a) be equipped with a sufficient number of toilets and sinks, and provide showers in accordance with the minimum standards of the New York city board of correction and the guidelines of the New York state commission of correction for multiple occupancy housing units; (b) have at least one window with access to natural light in each living space within such dormitory. The total area of all windows in each dormitory shall be a least one-tenth the floor area of such space; and (c) contain a minimum of 75 square feet (6.97 meters) of floor space per person in the sleeping area. 5. Housing units. Each housing unit in such facility shall (a) include a recreation area with access to fresh air and natural light; and (b) contain a kitchenette. 6. Bathrooms shall be accessible at all times to individuals housed in each such facility. c. The department shall digitize paper-based communications and ensure that correctional facilities built after the effective date of the local law that added this section are wired in such a fashion to allow for such electronic communications. Such communication shall include but not be limited to (1) the location of incarcerated individuals, (2) communications between staff, (3) the filing of grievances, and (4) communications regarding bail status, in accordance with standards set by correctional oversight agencies. d. This section is not intended to encompass the entirety of standards to apply to jail facilities. § 9-160 Reports during public health emergencies. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Application for compassionate release. The term application for compassionate release means an application submitted, with the consent of the incarcerated individual, by correctional health services to the incarcerated individual's defense attorney to be used to request that a court release the incarcerated individual. Cumulative infections. The term cumulative infections means the total number of positive infections of people who have been incarcerated during a given public health emergency, regardless of whether those individuals have been discharged after being confirmed positive while in the department's custody. Infection. The term infection means any infection that is the subject of a public health emergency. Public health emergency. The term public health emergency means any declared state of emergency made in response to an outbreak of an infectious disease. Staff. The term staff means civilian and uniform staff of the department of correction and correctional health staff. b. During the duration of any public health emergency, the department and correctional health services shall submit to the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the correctional health services website, a weekly report related to the outbreak of infectious diseases in city jails. Such report shall be submitted in a machine-readable format and stored permanently on correctional health services' website, and include the following information for each day in the preceding week: 1. The number of incarcerated individuals tested for the infection, disaggregated by each day starting from the first day of the announcement of the public health emergency, or for the COVID-19 pandemic, each day starting from March 13, 2020, in total and disaggregated by whether such tests were positive, negative, or pending results. For those dates following the effective date of the local law that added this section, the number of incarcerated individuals tested for the infection shall be further disaggregated by the reason the test was administered; 2. The number of incarcerated individuals currently diagnosed with the infection; unless otherwise reported by the board of correction; 3. The number of currently incarcerated individuals who have been diagnosed with the infection but are no longer contagious; 4. The number of tests administered to incarcerated individuals; 5. The cumulative number of unique incarcerated individuals who have been tested for the infection, disaggregated by whether test results were positive or negative; 6. Cumulative number of tests administered, disaggregated by whether test results were positive or negative; 7. The cumulative number of staff who voluntarily self reported to be medically confirmed with the infection; disaggregated by whether such infections were of uniform, civilian, or correctional health staff; unless otherwise reported by the board of correction. 8. The total number of staff employed by the department, disaggregated by uniform and non-uniform staff; and further disaggregated by out sick and not out sick; 9. The number of deaths of incarcerated individuals related to the infection; 10. The cumulative number of incarcerated individuals provided applications for compassionate release, in total and disaggregated by number of such individuals released; 11. The number of incarcerated individuals known to correctional health services to be hospitalized due to the infection; 12. The cumulative number of incarcerated individuals known to correctional health services to be hospitalized due to the infection; 13. The number of people in custody with a serious mental illness; and c. During the duration of any public health emergency, the department of correction shall provide a weekly report related to the outbreak of infectious diseases in city jails to the board of correction and to the speaker. Such reports shall include, for the previous week and the previous month: 1. The number of individuals incarcerated solely on a definite sentence, disaggregated by how many such individuals have 30 or fewer, 31 - 60, and 60 - 90 days remaining to serve on such sentence; 2. The number of individuals incarcerated solely on a definite sentence, disaggregated by which individuals have been deemed medically vulnerable by correctional health services. 3. The number of calls made to any correctional health services phone number designed to handle calls from incarcerated individuals, and the number of voice messages left on such phone number; d. Correctional health services in collaboration with the department of correction shall provide and ensure the distribution of a weekly written communication to persons in custody including information about the public health emergency and a frequently asked questions section. e. During the duration of a public health emergency, the department and correctional health services shall submit to the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department's website, a timeline of significant events related to the public health emergency, including but not limited to general criteria for testing and discharge planning related to the public health emergency. Such a timeline shall be updated weekly. f. Privacy. Reports required pursuant to this section shall not contain identifying information as defined in section 23-1201 of the administrative code of the city of New York. If a category to be reported contains fewer than ten individuals or contains an amount that would allow another category that contains fewer than ten individuals to be deduced, the number shall be replaced with a symbol. § 9-161 Doula services. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term doula means a trained person who provides continuous physical, emotional and informational support to a pregnant person and the family before, during or shortly after childbirth, for the purpose of assisting a pregnant person through the birth experience; or a trained person who supports the family of a newborn during the first days and weeks after childbirth, providing evidence-based information, practical help and advice to the family on newborn care, self-care and nurturing of the new family unit. b. The department shall retain an organization to make at least two doulas at any given time available to provide doula services twice a week, for four hours, at all department facilities that house incarcerated persons who identify as female, as well as to provide doula services during labor and delivery, upon request. c. The department shall ensure that doula services are available at a frequency to be determined by factors including available department resources and exigent circumstances. The department shall permit doulas to access the nursery, as defined in section 9-142, to access areas where programming is typically provided and to accompany incarcerated individuals to medical appointments, upon request. All known pregnant individuals in the custody of the department are permitted to utilize doula services in labor, delivery and postpartum rooms. Prior to their entry into a departmental facility, doulas shall be subject to the department's service provider processing security clearance protocol. d. No later than January 15, 2023 and every six months thereafter, the department shall provide to the speaker of the council and publish on its website, in a machine readable format, a report on the number of doula service hours provided, the types of services provided, and the number of incarcerated individuals served in the previous six month period. e. No later than January 31, 2023, the commissioner of correction shall convene a working group composed of the speaker of the city council or the speaker's designee; commissioner of correction or the commissioner's designee; representatives from the department of health and mental hygiene; representatives from the organization providing doula services pursuant to subdivision b of this section; and department staff who regularly work on programming for incarcerated persons who identify as female. Until August 31, 2029, the working group shall meet every six months to review the reports required by subdivision d of this section, review relevant reports issued by the organization providing doula services, consider any reports issued by city agencies regarding maternal health and discuss improving communication, collaboration and efficiency related to pregnant individuals in custody. After September 1, 2029, the working group shall meet at least once a year to review relevant the reports required by subdivision d of this section, review relevant reports issued by the organization providing doula services, consider any reports issued by city agencies regarding maternal health and discuss improving communication, collaboration and efficiency related to pregnant individuals in custody. § 9-162 Commissary accounts of incarcerated individuals. a. When an incarcerated individual is released from custody in a departmental facility, the department shall, as part of the discharge process, assist the individual in receiving unused commissary funds. Such assistance shall be given in a language the incarcerated individual can understand and shall include but not be limited to providing such individual, orally and in writing, information on the amount of commissary funds remaining in their account, how to obtain such funds and the locations at which they can immediately receive up to $200 in cash of such funds. For the purposes of this section, the term commissary funds has the same meaning as the term prisoner funds set forth in subdivision f of section 500-c of the correction law and in section 7016.2 of title 9 of the New York code of rules and regulations, or any successor provisions of such law or rules. b. Immediately upon request from a formerly incarcerated individual at a location at which commissary funds are made available, the department shall return up to $200 of such funds in cash, and any funds to which such individual is entitled that exceed $200 shall be distributed by check and sent by mail if all necessary information, including a name and mailing address, is provided by such individual. The department shall also make such checks available to be retrieved by the formerly incarcerated individual in person at the cashier window within three business days of receiving a request from a formerly incarcerated individual. Such formerly incarcerated individual will have 90 days to retrieve such check in person. If such individual does not pick up the check within 90 days, the individual may request a new check to be issued. The department shall attempt to contact the formerly incarcerated individual if such individual does not pick up the check within 90 days and notify such individual that they may request a new check to be issued. Such individual must pick up the new check within 90 days. c. No formerly incarcerated individual receiving unused commissary funds shall pay any fee in connection with the procedures established in accordance with this section for receiving such funds. d. No later than December 1, 2022, the department shall establish a plan, upon consultation with the agency or agencies designated by the mayor, for raising awareness regarding the procedures by which formerly incarcerated individuals can obtain commissary funds and for retrieving information necessary to return such funds to such individuals. The department shall make reasonable efforts to return unused commissary funds to their rightful owners. e. No later than May 31, 2023 and by May 31 of each subsequent year thereafter, the department shall report to the council and post permanently on its website a report of the aggregate amount of commissary funds remaining in the accounts of all individuals who are no longer in the custody of the department, the number of such accounts and efforts made in each year to return any unclaimed funds during the reporting period. § 9-163 Medical care and outcomes for incarcerated pregnant persons. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Department. The term “department” means the New York city department of correction. Maternal mortality. The term “maternal mortality” means the death of a person that occurs during pregnancy, or within one year from the end of pregnancy, regardless of the duration of such pregnancy. Pregnancy-associated death. The term “pregnancy-associated death” means the death of a person from any cause during pregnancy or within one year from the end of pregnancy. Pregnancy-related death. The term “pregnancy-related death” means the death of a person (i) during pregnancy or within one year from the end of pregnancy that (ii) is due to a pregnancy complication, a chain of events initiated by pregnancy or the aggravation of an unrelated condition by the physiologic effects of pregnancy. Relevant agencies. The term “relevant agencies” includes the department of health and mental hygiene, New York city health and hospitals corporation, any successor of an agency specified in this definition and any other agency that the service deems relevant. Service. The term “service” means correctional health services, as defined in section 9-108. b. Report. By no later than 90 days after the effective date of the local law that added this section, and every fifteenth day of February thereafter, correctional health services, in consultation with the relevant agencies, shall submit a report to the mayor and the speaker of the council and post such report on its website based on data from the prior calendar year. Such report shall include, but need not be limited to: 1. The number of pregnant persons in the custody of the department; 2. The number of incarcerated pregnant persons whose pregnancy resulted in a live birth while in the custody of the department; 3. The number of incarcerated pregnant persons whose pregnancy resulted in a miscarriage while in the custody of the department; 4. The number of incarcerated pregnant persons whose pregnancy resulted in a still birth while in the custody of the department; 5. The number of maternal mortalities known to the service while in the custody of the department; 6. The number of maternal mortalities while in the custody of the department considered to be a pregnancy-associated death, if information necessary to make such determination is available to the service; 7. The number of maternal mortalities while in the custody of the department considered to be a pregnancy-related death, if information necessary to make such determination is available to the service; 8. The number of persons in the custody of the department receiving prenatal care; and 9. The number of persons in the custody of the department receiving postnatal care. c. Confidentiality. The service shall report information required by subdivision b of this section in a manner that does not jeopardize the confidentiality of an incarcerated pregnant person. § 9-164 Civil service examinations. a. The commissioner of citywide administrative services, in collaboration with the commissioner, shall administer civil service examinations for individuals incarcerated for a period of 10 days or longer in any city correctional facility. The commissioner of citywide administrative services, in consultation with the commissioner, shall determine the location of the administration of such examinations. Any such individual who meets the minimum qualifications required to sit for a civil service examination shall be permitted to take such examination, absent any significant overriding security concern or exigent circumstances, provided that such individual shall be offered a makeup examination when such concern or circumstances are no longer present. The department shall make available study materials and practice examinations, as practicable, to such individuals. b. The commissioner, in collaboration with the commissioner of citywide administrative services, shall make available information regarding civil service examinations to individuals incarcerated for a period of 10 days or longer in any city correctional facility, including basic or introductory civil service information sessions; information regarding the examination process, including how to apply for an examination; and any existing schedule of civil service examinations. c. The department shall make available for individuals incarcerated for a period of 10 days or longer in any city correctional facility written information related to in-person assistance sessions at borough-based civil service examination testing centers, including information regarding individual examination applications and civil service examinations. Such information shall also be made available to such individuals upon release from the custody of the department. § 9-165 Reporting on gender identity. a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Department. The term “department” means the department of correction. Discrimination. The term “discrimination” means the act of making unfair or prejudicial distinctions between people based on the groups, classes, identities, or other categories to which they belong or are perceived to belong. Gender identity. The term “gender identity” means a person’s sense of their own gender which may be the same as or different from their sex assigned at birth. Gender nonconforming. The term “gender nonconforming” means a person whose gender expression differs from gender stereotypes, norms, and expectations in a given culture or historical period. Harassment. The term “harassment” means unwelcome conduct that is based on someone's gender identity, gender expression, sex, or sexual orientation. Housing unit. The term “housing unit” means a structure or part of a structure that contains single occupancy housing units or multiple occupancy housing units, as such terms are defined in the rules of the New York state commission of correction. Intersex. The term “intersex” refers to a person whose sex characteristics, including, but not limited to chromosomes, hormones, gonads, and genitalia, do not conform with a binary construction of sex as either male or female. This term may not be the same as a person’s gender identity and is not the same as a person’s sexual orientation. Non-binary. The term “non-binary” refers to a person whose gender identity is not exclusively male or female. Transgender. The term “transgender” refers to a person whose gender identity does not conform to the sex assigned at birth. Violence. The term “violence” means the use of force or power, threatened or actual, against another person, or against a group or community. b. Within 45 days of the end of each quarter of the fiscal year, the commissioner shall submit to the mayor, the speaker of the council, and the public advocate, and post on the department’s website, a quarterly report containing the following information based on the number of incarcerated individual admissions during the reporting period, and the average daily population of the city’s jails for the preceding quarter in total, and as a percentage of the average daily population of incarcerated individuals in the department’s custody during the reporting period: 1. The total number of persons in the custody of the department; 2. The total and average numbers of persons in the Special Consideration Unit, or any other housing unit dedicated to the housing of transgender, gender nonconforming, non-binary, or intersex persons; 3. The number and percentage of persons in the custody of the department who have identified themselves to the department, or have been identified by another person or agency on their behalf, as having a gender identity different from the sex assigned to the person at birth, or that were assigned an X gender marker or an intersex identification at birth; This data shall be further disaggregated by self-described gender identity including, but not limited to, transgender, gender non-conforming, non-binary, or intersex; 4. The total number of persons described in paragraph 3 of this subdivision housed in each jail facility; 5. The number and percentage of such persons described in paragraph 3 of this subdivision who were denied placement in a jail facility that most closely aligns with their gender identity after making a written request for such housing; 6. The number and percentage of such persons described in paragraph 3 of this subdivision who were denied placement in a housing unit dedicated to the housing of TGNCNBI identified people, regardless of whether such unit is in a facility most closely aligned with their gender identity; 7. The number and percentage of such persons as described in paragraph 3 of this subdivision who have been involuntarily transferred out of a jail facility that most closely aligns with their gender identity; 8. The number and percentage of such persons as described in paragraph 3 of this subdivision who have made an allegation, complaint, or report, whether verbal or in writing, as a result of experiencing violence, harassment, or discrimination. For the purposes of this paragraph, an allegation, complaint, or report shall include a grievance, to 311 or to any DOC staff person by an incarcerated person, or by any person or agency on their behalf, or as included in any report of a use or force or other reportable incident as required to be filed by DOC staff; 9. The facility and housing units in which such individuals as described in paragraph 1 of this subdivision are currently housed shall be reported with the number of such individuals housed in each housing unit. This shall be disaggregated by type, including but not limited to, new admission, mental observation, restrictive housing, protective custody, involuntary protective custody, general population, the Special Considerations Unit. This report shall further identify the number of individuals for whom a security classification has increased upon moving from men’s to women’s housing. c. The report required by this section shall not contain identifying information as defined in section 23-1201. If a category to be reported contains fewer than 5 persons or contains an amount that would allow another category that contains fewer than 5 persons to be deduced, the number shall be replaced with a symbol. If a category to be reported contains zero individuals it shall be reported as zero. § 9-166 Dyslexia screening and evidence-based programs. a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Department. The term “department” means the department of correction. Dyslexia. The term “dyslexia” has the same meaning as such term is defined in subsection 1 of section 3635 of title 18 of the United States code. b. The department shall offer to screen all incarcerated persons between the ages of 18 and 21 who self-report that they do not have a high school diploma or its equivalent for being at risk of dyslexia within 10 days of entering custody of the department. Provided that the department of education may screen such persons who enroll in a program administered by the department of education for being at risk of dyslexia. Any information provided to such incarcerated individuals about available educational services must include specific information about the availability of screening for being at risk of dyslexia and evidence-based interventions based on such screening. Any refusal by such incarcerated person to be screened for dyslexia or to receive educational services offered by the department of education at the time of such screening must be documented by either a video or written statement by the incarcerated individual. The department shall refer such incarcerated person who was identified through the screening as being at risk of dyslexia to a program that provides evidence-based interventions as necessary for persons who are at risk of dyslexia. c. No later than December 31, 2024, the department shall offer to screen all incarcerated individuals over the age of 21 who self-report that they do not have a high school diploma or its equivalent and who received a sentence of imprisonment and are subject to an order of commitment that provides that such incarcerated individual shall remain in the custody of the department. The department shall offer to screen such incarcerated individuals within 10 days of receiving such order. The department shall refer an incarcerated person who was identified through the screening as being at risk of dyslexia to a program that provides evidence-based interventions as necessary for persons who are at risk of dyslexia. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this subdivision, the department need not offer such screening where such incarcerated individual previously received such screening by the department. d. No later than December 31, 2025, the department shall offer to screen all incarcerated persons over the age of 21 who self-report that they do not have a high school diploma or its equivalent for dyslexia within 10 days of entering custody of the department. The department shall refer an incarcerated person who was identified through the screening as being at risk of dyslexia to a program that provides evidence-based interventions as necessary for persons who are at risk of dyslexia. e. The department may enter into an agreement with another agency to provide such evidence-based interventions and shall coordinate with the office of criminal justice and city-contracted programs that serve justice-involved individuals to identify and provide referrals to dyslexia screening programs and evidence-based interventions available to individuals after being released from the custody of the department. f. No later than December 31, 2024 and quarterly thereafter, the commissioner shall submit to the mayor, the speaker of the council and the public advocate and post conspicuously on the department’s website a report regarding dyslexia screening and referrals for enrollment in evidence-based intervention programs in city jails. Such report shall not contain personally identifiable information. Such report shall include the following information for the previous quarter: 1. The number of individuals who were screened by the department for being at risk of dyslexia pursuant to subdivision b of this section; 2. The number of individuals who were screened by the department for being at risk of dyslexia pursuant to subdivision c of this section; 3. The number of individuals who were screened by the department for being at risk of dyslexia pursuant to subdivision d of this section; 4. The number of individuals who were identified through screening as being at risk of dyslexia disaggregated by race, gender, zip code of last known address, and age as follows: 18-21, 22-25, 26-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, 60-69, 70 or older; and 5. The number of individuals who received a referral and participated in evidence-based interventions as a result of screening, disaggregated by race, gender, zip code of last known address, and age as follows: 18-21, 22-25, 26-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, 60-69, 70 or older. § 9-167 Solitary confinement. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Advocate. The term “advocate” means a person who is a law student, paralegal, or an incarcerated person. Cell. The term “cell” means any room, area or space that is not a shared space conducive to meaningful, regular and congregate social interaction among many people in a group setting, where an individual is held for any purpose. De-escalation confinement. The term “de-escalation confinement” means holding an incarcerated person in a cell immediately following an incident where the person has caused physical injury or poses a specific risk of imminent serious physical injury to staff, themselves or other incarcerated persons. Emergency lock-in. The term “emergency lock-in” means a department-wide emergency lock-in, a facility emergency lock-in, a housing area emergency lock- in, or a partial facility emergency lock-in as defined in section 9-155. Out-of-cell. The term “out-of-cell” means being in a space outside of, and in an area away from a cell, in a group setting with other people all in the same shared space without physical barriers separating such people that is conducive to meaningful and regular social interaction and activity or being in any space during the time of carrying out medical treatment, individual one-on- one counseling, an attorney visit or court appearance. Pre-hearing temporary restrictive housing. The term “pre-hearing temporary restrictive housing” means any restrictive housing designated for incarcerated persons who continue to pose a specific risk of imminent serious physical injury to staff, themselves, or other incarcerated persons after a period of de-escalation confinement has exceeded time limits established by this section and prior to a hearing for recommended placement in restrictive housing has taken place. Restraints. For the purposes of this section, the term “restraints” means any object, device or equipment that impedes movement of hands, legs, or any other part of the body. Restrictive housing. The term “restrictive housing” means any housing area that separates incarcerated persons from the general jail population on the basis of security concerns or discipline, or a housing area that poses restrictions on programs, services, interactions with other incarcerated persons or other conditions of confinement. This definition excludes housing designated for incarcerated persons who are: (1) in need of medical or mental health support as determined by the entity providing or overseeing correctional medical and mental health, including placement in a contagious disease unit, (2) transgender or gender non-conforming, (3) in need of voluntary protective custody, or (4) housed in a designated location for the purpose of school attendance. Solitary confinement. The term “solitary confinement” means any placement of an incarcerated person in a cell, other than at night for sleeping for a period not to exceed eight hours in any 24-hour period or during the day for a count not to exceed two hours in any 24-hour period. Suicide prevention aide. For the purposes of this section, the term “suicide prevention aide” means a person in custody who has been trained to identify unusual and/or suicidal behavior. Violent grade I offense. The term “violent grade I offense” shall have the same meaning as defined by the rules of the department of correction as of January 1, 2022. b. Ban on solitary confinement. The department shall not place an incarcerated person in a cell, other than at night for sleeping for a period not to exceed eight hours in any 24-hour period or during the day for count not to exceed two hours in any 24-hour period, unless for the purpose of de- escalation confinement or during emergency lock-ins. c. De-escalation confinement. The department’s uses of de-escalation confinement shall comply with the following provisions: 1. De-escalation confinement shall not be located in intake areas and shall not take place in decontamination showers. Spaces used for de-escalation confinement must, at a minimum, have the features specified in sections 1-03 and 1-04 of title 40 of the rules of the city of New York and be maintained in accordance with the personal hygiene and space requirements set forth in such sections; 2. Department staff must regularly monitor a person in de-escalation confinement and engage in continuous crisis intervention and de-escalation to support the person’s health and well-being, attempt de-escalation, work toward a person’s release from de-escalation confinement and determine whether it is necessary to continue to hold such person in such confinement; 3. The department shall conduct visual and aural observation of each person in de-escalation confinement every 15 minutes, shall refer any health concerns to medical or mental health staff, and shall bring any person displaying any indications of any need for medical documentation, observation, or treatment to the medical clinic. Suicide prevention aides may conduct check- ins with a person in de-escalation confinement at least every 15 minutes and refer any health concerns to department staff who will get medical or mental health staff to treat any reported immediate health needs. No suicide prevention aide shall face any retaliation or other harm for carrying out their role; 4. Throughout de-escalation confinement, a person shall have access to a tablet or device that allows such person to make phone calls outside of the facility and to medical staff in the facility; 5. A person shall be removed from de-escalation confinement immediately following when such person has sufficiently gained control and no longer poses a significant risk of imminent serious physical injury to themselves or others; 6. The maximum duration a person can be held in de-escalation confinement shall not exceed four hours immediately following the incident precipitating such person’s placement in such confinement. Under no circumstances may the department place a person in de-escalation confinement for more than four hours total in any 24-hour period, or more than 12 hours in any seven-day period; and 7. In circumstances permitted in subdivision g of this section, the department may transfer a person from de-escalation confinement to pre-hearing temporary restrictive housing. (a) The department shall not place any incarcerated person in a locked decontamination shower nor in any other locked space in any facility that does not have, at a minimum, the features specified in sections 1-03 and 1-04 of title 40 of the rules of the city of New York and maintained in accordance with the personal hygiene and space requirements as set forth in such sections. (b) The department shall not maintain any locked decontamination showers. Any other locked spaces in any facility for holding incarcerated people must at least have the features specified in and maintained in accordance with the personal hygiene and space requirements set forth in 40 RCNY  1-03 and  1-04. d. Reporting on de-escalation confinement. For each instance an incarcerated person is placed in de-escalation confinement as described in subdivision c of this section, the department shall prepare an incident report that includes a detailed description of why isolation was necessary to de- escalate an immediate conflict and the length of time the incarcerated person was placed in such confinement. Beginning on July 15, 2024, and within 15 days of the end of each subsequent quarter, the department shall provide the speaker of the council and the board of correction all such reports for the preceding quarter and post all such reports on the department’s website. The department shall redact all personally identifying information prior to posting such reports on the department’s website. Beginning July 31, 2024, and within 30 days of the end of each subsequent quarter, the department shall provide to the speaker of the council and the board of correction, and post on the department’s website, a report with data for the preceding quarter on the total number of people placed in such confinement, disaggregated by race, age, gender identity and mental health treatment level, as well as the total number of people held in such confinement disaggregated by whether confinement lasted less than one hour, between one and two hours, between two and three hours, and between three and four hours. e. Use of restraints. 1. The department shall not place an incarcerated person in restraints unless an individualized determination is made that restraints are necessary to prevent an imminent risk of self-injury or injury to other persons. In such instances, only the least restrictive form of restraints may be used and may be used no longer than is necessary to abate such imminent harm. Restraints shall not be used on an incarcerated person under the age of 22 except in the following circumstances: (i) during transportation in and out of a facility, provided that during transportation no person shall be secured to an immovable object; and (ii) during escorted movement within a facility to and from out-of- cell activities where an individualized determination is made that restraints are necessary to prevent an immediate risk of self-injury or injury to other persons. The department is prohibited from engaging in attempts to unnecessarily prolong, delay or undermine an individual’s escorted movements. 2. The department shall not place an incarcerated person in restraints beyond the use of restraints described in paragraph 1 of this subdivision, or on two consecutive days, until a hearing is held to determine if the continued use of restraints is necessary for the safety of others. Such hearing shall comply with the rules of the board of correction as described in paragraph 1 of subdivision f of this section. Any continued use of restraints must be reviewed by the department on a daily basis and discontinued once there is no longer an imminent risk of self-injury or injury to other persons. Continued use of restraints may only be authorized for seven consecutive days. f. Restrictive housing hearing. Except as provided in subdivision g of this section, the department shall not place an incarcerated person in restrictive housing until a hearing on such placement is held and the person is found to have committed a violent grade I offense. Any required hearing regarding placement of a person into restrictive housing shall comply with rules to be established by the board of correction. 1. The board of correction shall establish rules for restrictive housing hearings that shall, at a minimum, include the following provisions: (i) An incarcerated person shall have the right to be represented by their legal counsel or advocate; (ii) An incarcerated person shall have the right to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses; (iii) Witnesses shall testify in person at the hearing unless the witnesses’ presence would jeopardize the safety of themselves or others or security of the facility. If a witness is excluded from testifying in person, the basis for the exclusion shall be documented in the hearing record; (iv) If a witness refuses to provide testimony at the hearing, the department must provide the basis for the witness’s refusal, videotape such refusal, or obtain a signed refusal form, to be included as part of the hearing record; (v) The department shall provide the incarcerated person and their legal counsel or advocate written notice of the reason for proposed placement in restrictive housing and any supporting evidence for such placement, no later than 48 hours prior to the restrictive housing hearing; (vi) The department shall provide the legal counsel or advocate adequate time to prepare for such hearings and shall grant reasonable requests for adjournments; (vii) An incarcerated person shall have the right to an interpreter in their native language if the person does not understand or is unable to communicate in English. The department shall take reasonable steps to provide such interpreter; (viii) A refusal by an incarcerated person to attend any restrictive housing hearings must be videotaped and made part of the hearing record; (ix) If the incarcerated person is excluded or removed from a restrictive housing hearing because it is determined that such person’s presence will jeopardize the safety of themselves or others or security of the facility, the basis for such exclusion must be documented in the hearing record; (x) A restrictive housing disposition shall be reached within five business days after the conclusion of the hearing. Such disposition must be supported by substantial evidence, shall be documented in writing, and must contain the following information: a finding of guilty or not guilty, a summary of each witness’s testimony and whether their testimony was credited or rejected with the reasons thereof, the evidence relied upon by the hearing officer in reaching their finding, and the sanction imposed, if any; and (xi) A written copy of the hearing disposition shall be provided to the incarcerated person and their counsel or advocate within 24 hours of the determination. 2. Failure to comply with any of the provisions described in paragraph 1 of this subdivision, or as established by board of correction rule, shall constitute a due process violation warranting dismissal of the matter that led to the hearing. g. Pre-hearing temporary restrictive housing. In exceptional circumstances, the department may place a person in pre-hearing temporary restrictive housing prior to conducting a restrictive housing hearing as required by subdivision f of this section. 1. Such placement shall only occur upon written approval of the Commissioner or a Deputy Commissioner, or another equivalent member of department senior leadership over the operations of security. Such written approval shall include: the basis for a reasonable belief that the incarcerated person has committed a violent grade I offense, and whether such person has caused serious physical injury or poses a specific and significant risk of imminent serious physical injury to staff or other incarcerated persons. 2. A restrictive housing hearing shall occur as soon as reasonably practicable following placement in pre-hearing temporary restrictive housing, and must occur within five days of such placement, unless the person placed in such restrictive housing seeks a postponement of such hearing. 3. If a person is found guilty at a restrictive housing hearing, time spent in pre-hearing temporary restrictive housing prior to such hearing determination shall be deducted from any sentence of restrictive housing and such time shall count toward the time limits in restrictive housing. 4. Pre-hearing temporary restrictive housing shall comply with all requirements for restrictive housing, including but not limited to those established in subdivision h of this section. 5. During the first day of placement in pre-hearing temporary restrictive housing, department staff must regularly monitor the person and engage in continuous crisis intervention and attempt de-escalation, work toward a person’s release from pre-hearing temporary restrictive housing and determine whether it is necessary to continue to hold the person in pre-hearing temporary restrictive housing. h. Restrictive housing regulations. The department’s use of restrictive housing must comply with the following provisions: 1. The department shall not place an incarcerated person in restrictive housing for longer than necessary and for no more than a total of 60 days in any 12 month period. 2. Within 15 days of placement of an incarcerated person in restrictive housing, the department shall meaningfully review such placement to determine whether the incarcerated person continues to present a specific, significant and imminent threat to the safety and security of other persons if housed outside restrictive housing. If an individual is not discharged from restrictive housing after review, the department shall provide in writing to the incarcerated person: (i) the reasons for the determination that such person must remain in restrictive housing and (ii) any recommended program, treatment, service, or corrective action. The department shall provide the incarcerated person access to such available programs, treatment and services. 3. The department shall discharge an incarcerated person from restrictive housing if such person has not engaged in behavior that presents a specific, significant, and imminent threat to the safety and security of themselves or other persons during the preceding 15 days. In all circumstances, the department shall discharge an incarcerated person from restrictive housing within 30 days after their initial placement in such housing. 4. A person placed in restrictive housing must have interaction with other people and access to congregate programming and amenities comparable to those housed outside restrictive housing, including access to at least seven hours per day of out-of-cell congregate programming or activities with groups of people in a group setting all in the same shared space without physical barriers separating such people that is conducive to meaningful and regular social interaction. If a person voluntarily chooses not to participate in congregate programming, they shall be offered access to comparable individual programming. A decision to voluntarily decline to participate in congregate programming must be done in writing or by videotape. 5. The department shall utilize programming that addresses the unique needs of those in restrictive housing. The department shall provide persons in restrictive housing with access to core educational and other programming comparable to core programs in the general population. The department shall also provide persons in restrictive housing access to evidence-based therapeutic interventions and restorative justice programs aimed at addressing the conduct resulting in their placement in restrictive housing. Such programs shall be individualized and trauma-informed, include positive incentive behavior modification models, and follow best practices for violence interruption. Staff that routinely interact with incarcerated persons must be trained in de-escalation techniques, conflict resolution, the use of force policy, and related topics to address the unique needs of those in restrictive housing units. 6. The department shall use positive incentives to encourage good behavior in restrictive housing units and may use disciplinary sanctions only as a last resort in response to behavior presenting a serious and evident danger to oneself or others after other measures have not alleviated such behavior. 7. All housing for medical or mental health support provided to persons recommended to receive such support by the entity providing and,or overseeing correctional medical and mental health, including placement in contagious disease units, housing for people who are transgender or gender non-conforming, housing for voluntary protective custody, and housing for purposes of school attendance, shall comply with subdivisions (b), (c), (e), (i), (j) and (k) of this section and paragraphs 4, 5, and 6 of this subdivision. 8. For purposes of contagious disease units, after a referral from health care staff, a person may be held in a medical unit overseen by health care staff, for as limited a time as medically necessary as exclusively determined by health care staff, in the least restrictive environment that is medically appropriate. Individuals in a contagious disease unit must have comparable access as individuals incarcerated in the general population to phone calls, emails, visits, and programming done in a manner consistent with the medical and mental health treatment being received, such as at a physical distance determined appropriate by medical or mental health staff.Such access must be comparable to access provided to persons incarcerated outside of restrictive housing units. 9. Reporting on restrictive housing. For each instance a disciplinary charge that could result in restrictive housing is dismissed or an incarcerated individual is found not guilty of the disciplinary charge, the department shall prepare an incident report that includes a description of the disciplinary charge and the reasons for the dismissal or not guilty determination. For each instance an incarcerated person is placed in restrictive housing, the department shall prepare an incident report that includes a detailed description of the behavior that resulted in placement in restrictive housing and why restrictive housing was necessary to address such behavior, including if a person was placed in pre-hearing temporary restrictive housing and the reasons why the situation met the requirements in paragraph 1 of subdivision g of this section. For each instance in which confinement in restrictive housing is continued after a 15-day review of an incarcerated person’s placement in restrictive housing, the department shall prepare an incident report as to why the person was not discharged, including a detailed description of how the person continued to present a specific, significant and imminent threat to the safety and security of the facility if housed outside restrictive housing and what program, treatment, service, and/or corrective action was required before discharge. Beginning on July 15, 2024, and within 15 days of the end of each subsequent quarter, the department shall provide the speaker of the council and the board of correction all such reports for the prior quarter and post all such reports on the department’s website. The department shall redact all personally identifying information prior to posting the reports on the department’s website. Beginning July 31, 2024, and within 30 days of the end of each subsequent quarter, the department shall provide to the speaker of the council and the board of correction, and post on the department’s website, a report with data for the preceding quarter on the total number of people placed in restrictive housing during that time period, disaggregated by race, age, gender identity, mental health treatment level and length of time in restrictive housing, and data on all disposition outcomes of all restrictive housing hearing during such time period, disaggregated by charge, race, age, gender identity and mental health treatment level. i. Out-of-cell time. 1. All incarcerated persons must have access to at least 14 out-of-cell hours every day except while in de-escalation confinement pursuant to subdivision c of this section and during emergency lock-ins pursuant to subdivision j of this section. 2. Incarcerated persons may congregate with others and move about their housing area freely during out-of-cell time and have access to education and programming pursuant to section 9-110 of the administrative code. j. Emergency lock-ins. 1. Emergency lock-ins may only be used when the Commissioner, a Deputy Commissioner, or another equivalent member of department senior leadership with responsibility for the operations of security for a facility determines that such lock-in is necessary to de-escalate an emergency that poses a threat of specific, significant and imminent harm to incarcerated persons or staff. Emergency lock-ins may only be used when there are no less restrictive means available to address an emergency circumstance and only as a last resort after exhausting less restrictive measures. Emergency lock-ins must be confined to as narrow an area as possible and limited number of people as possible. The department shall lift emergency lock-ins as quickly as possible. The Commissioner, a Deputy Commissioner, or another equivalent member of department senior leadership over the operations of security shall review such lock-ins at least every hour. Such lock-ins may not last more than four hours. 2. Throughout an emergency lock-in, the department shall conduct visual and aural observation of every person locked in every fifteen (15) minutes, shall refer any health concerns to medical or mental health staff, and shall bring any person displaying any indications of any need for medical documentation, observation, or treatment to the medical clinic. Throughout an emergency lock-in, other than in a department-wide emergency lock-in or a facility emergency lock-in, each person locked in shall have access to a tablet or other device that allows the person to make phone calls both outside of the facility and to medical staff in the facility. 3. The department shall immediately provide notice to the public on its website of an emergency lock-in, including information on any restrictions on visits, phone calls, counsel visits or court appearances. 4. For each instance an emergency lock-in is imposed, the department shall prepare an incident report that includes: (a) A description of why the lock-in was necessary to investigate or de-escalate an emergency, including the ways in which it posed a threat of specific, significant and imminent harm; (b) A description of how other less restrictive measures were exhausted; (c) The number of people held in lock-in; (d) The length of lock-in; (e) The areas affected and the reasons such areas were subject to the emergency lock-in; (f) The medical and mental health services affected, the number of scheduled medical and or mental health appointments missed and requests that were denied; (g) Whether visits, counsel visits or court appearances were affected; (h) What programs, if any, were affected; (i) All actions taken during the lock-in to resolve and address the lock-in; and (j) The number of staff diverted for the lock-in. Beginning July 15, 2024, and within 15 days of the end of each subsequent quarter, the department shall provide the speaker of the council and the board of correction all such reports for the preceding quarter and shall post all such reports on the department’s website with any identifying information redacted. Beginning July 15, 2024, and within 15 days of the end of each subsequent quarter, the department shall provide to the speaker of the council and the board of correction a report on the total number of lock-ins occurring during the preceding quarter, the areas affected by each such lock-in, the length of each such lock-in and number of incarcerated people subject to each such lock-in, disaggregated by race, age, gender identity, mental health treatment level and length of time in cell confinement. k. Incarcerated persons under the age of 22 shall receive access to trauma-informed, age-appropriate programming and services on a consistent, regular basis. Chapter 2: Department of Probation § 9-201 Probation administrative fee. a. In accordance with section 257-c of the executive law, any individual currently serving or who shall be sentenced to a period of probation upon conviction of any crime under article thirty-one of the vehicle and traffic law shall pay to the department of probation an administrative fee of thirty dollars per month. b. The provisions of subdivision six of section 420.10 of the criminal procedure law shall govern for purposes of collection of the administrative fee. c. The administrative fee authorized by this subdivision shall not constitute, nor be imposed, as a condition of probation. d. The department of probation shall waive all or part of the administrative fee where, because of the indigence of the offender, the payment of the administrative fee would work an unreasonable hardship on the person convicted, his or her immediate family, or any other person who is dependent on such person for financial support. e. In the event of non-payment of any fees that have not been waived by the department of probation, the city of New York may seek to enforce payment in any manner permitted by law for enforcement of a debt. f. Monies collected pursuant to this section shall be utilized for probation services by the department of probation. § 9-202 Investigation fee. a. In accordance with section 252-a of the family court act, when ordered by the court to conduct an investigation pursuant to section six hundred fifty- three of the family court act, the department of probation shall receive an investigation fee of not less than fifty dollars and not more than five hundred dollars from the parties in such proceeding for performing such investigation. b. Such investigation fee shall be determined by the court based on the party's ability to pay the fee, and the schedule for payment shall be fixed by the court issuing the order for investigation, pursuant to the guidelines issued by the director of the New York state division of probation and correctional alternatives. c. The court, in its discretion, may waive the investigation fee when the parties lack sufficient means to pay the fee. d. The court shall apportion the investigation fee between the parties based upon the respective financial circumstances of the parties and the equities of the case. e. Fees pursuant to this section shall be paid directly to the department of probation to be retained and utilized for local probation services. § 9-203 Probation recidivism report. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Adjust. The term adjust has the same meaning as the process described in section 308.1 of the New York family court act, or any successor statute. Department. The term department means the New York city department of probation. Eligible year. The term eligible year means any year during which a court ordered the department to supervise a probationer that pursuant to such court order would have terminated during the reporting period. Probationer. The term probationer means a person the department has been ordered to supervise. b. No later than 90 days from January 1 of each year, beginning in 2017, the department shall provide to the council and publish on its website an annual report regarding recidivism. Such report shall include the information required by paragraphs 2 through 6 of this subdivision for every eligible year regarding probationers sentenced to probation during such eligible year. Such report shall include the following information for probationers who were under the supervision of the department during the previous calendar year: 1. The number of probationers, the average monthly number of probationers, and the number of probationers whose period of supervision began during the reporting period; 2. The number and percentage of probationers who were: (a) arrested for a non-criminal offense; (b) arrested for any crime; (c) arrested for a misdemeanor; (d) arrested for a felony; disaggregated by whether such felony is a violent felony offense as such term is defined by section 70.02 of the penal law or any successor statute, or whether such probationers were felony drug offenders or second felony drug offenders, as such terms are defined by section 70.70 of the penal law or any successor statute; (e) convicted of a non- criminal offense, (f) convicted of a misdemeanor; or (g) convicted of a felony, disaggregated by whether such felony is a violent felony offense as such term is defined by section 70.02 of the penal law or any successor statute, or whether such probationers were felony drug offenders or second felony drug offenders, as such terms are defined by section 70.70 of the penal law or any successor statute; 3. With respect to the probationers who were arrested for any non- criminal offense, misdemeanor or felony during their probation, as reported in paragraph 2 of this subdivision, the number of arrests that resulted in sentences of incarceration other than time served, disaggregated by such category of arrest; 4. The number and percentage of probationers who were arrested within the following periods of time from the date of their sentence: (a) 1 month, (b) 3 months, (c) 6 months, (d) 1 year, (e) 2 years, and (f) 3 years; 5. The number and percentage of probationers who: (a) were in full compliance with the terms of their probation, (b) violated the terms of their probation, in total and disaggregated by whether such violation was based on an arrest or another ground, or (c) violated the terms of their probation, and there was filed a related declaration of delinquency, petition of violation, or similar court filing, in total and disaggregated by whether such declaration was based on an arrest, a violation of the technical terms of probation, or absconding; 6. The number and percentage of probationers whose period of probation was successfully completed during the reporting period, and the mean and median length of their period of probation; and 7. The number of cases opened for adjustment during the reporting period that were monitored by the department, and the number and percentage of such cases in which those being monitored violated the terms of their monitoring. c. The information required by subdivision b of this section shall be reported in total and disaggregated by the following criteria: 1. The age of the probationer, where applicable, in the following categories at a minimum: (a) up to age 15, (b) 16-24, and (c) 25 and older. For the purposes of subdivision b of this section, such age shall be calculated by using the probationer's age at the end of the reporting period, and for the purposes of subdivision c of this section such age shall be calculated by using the probationer's age at the time at which their period of supervision began; 2. Whether the underlying case for which the probationer was ordered to be monitored by the department was classified by state law, or by equivalent laws of another state, as a: (a) juvenile delinquency, (b) juvenile offender, (c) youthful offender, or (d) adult criminal case; 3. For those probationers for whom the underlying case for which the probationer was ordered to be monitored was an adult criminal case, or the equivalent in another state, whether such case was a misdemeanor or felony; and 4. The risk level of the probationer, as described in section 351.6 of title 9 of the compilation of codes, rules and regulations of the state of New York, or any successor regulation. d. The information required by subdivisions b and c of this section shall be compared to previous reporting periods, and shall be stored permanently and shall be accessible from the department's website. § 9-204 Probation programming report. The department of probation shall evaluate the effectiveness of each program through which the department provides any structured service directly to probation clients. No later than 90 days from January 1 of each year, beginning in 2017, the department shall submit a summary of each evaluation to the mayor and the council, and post such summary to the department's website. This summary shall include criteria determined by the department, which shall include, but not be limited to, information related to the following for each such program: (i) the amount of funding received; (ii) the number of individuals served; (iii) a brief description of the services provided, including a program's length, requirements, and target populations, where applicable; and (iv) recidivism and compliance rates, if applicable, provided that such summary may calculate recidivism without using data for participants who only participated in such programming for a minimal period of time, where such period of time is identified in such summary. § 9-205 Persons not to be detained. a. For the purposes of this section, all terms shall have the same meanings as set forth in section 9-131, except that the term department means department of probation. b. The department may only honor a civil immigration detainer by holding a person if: 1. federal immigration authorities present the department with a judicial warrant for the detention of the person who is the subject of such civil immigration detainer at the time such civil immigration detainer is presented; and 2. a search of state and federal databases, or any similar or successor databases, accessed through the New York state division of criminal justice services e-JusticeNY computer application, or any similar or successor computer application maintained by the city or state of New York, indicates, or the department has been informed by a court or any other governmental entity, that such person: (a) has been convicted of a violent or serious crime, or (b) is identified as a possible match in the terrorist screening database. c. No conferral of authority. Nothing in this section shall be construed to confer any authority on any entity to hold persons on civil immigration detainers beyond the authority, if any, that existed prior to the enactment of this section. d. No conflict with existing law. This section supersedes all conflicting policies, rules, procedures and practices of the city. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power, duty or obligation in conflict with any applicable law. e. No private right of action. Nothing contained in this section or in the administration or application hereof shall be construed as creating any private right of action on the part of any persons or entity against the city or the department, or any official or employee thereof. f. Reporting. No later than September 1, 2018, and no later than September 1 of each year thereafter, the department shall post a report on its website that includes the following information for the preceding 12-month period ending June 30: 1. the number of civil immigration detainers received from federal immigration authorities; 2. the number of persons held pursuant to civil immigration detainers; 3. the number of persons transferred to the custody of federal immigration authorities pursuant to civil immigration detainers; 4. the number of persons for whom civil immigration detainers were not honored; and 5. the number of requests from federal immigration authorities concerning a person's incarceration status, release dates, court appearance dates, scheduled appointment dates or times, or any other information related to such person, and the number of responses honoring such requests, disaggregated by: i. the number of responses to federal immigration authorities concerning a person with no convictions for a violent or serious crime, disaggregated by the number of such responses that included incarceration status, release dates, court appearance dates, scheduled appointment dates or times, or other types of information, and whether the department facilitated the transfer of such persons to the custody of federal immigration authorities; ii. the number of responses to federal immigration authorities concerning a person with at least one conviction for a violent or serious crime, disaggregated by the number of such responses that included incarceration status, release dates, court appearance dates, scheduled appointment dates or times, or other types of information, and whether the department facilitated the transfer of such persons to the custody of federal immigration authorities; and iii. the number of responses to federal immigration authorities concerning a person with no convictions for a violent or serious crime who were identified as a possible match in the terrorist screening database, disaggregated by the number of such responses that included incarceration status, release dates, court appearance dates, scheduled appointment dates or times, or other types of information, and whether the department facilitated the transfer of such persons to the custody of federal immigration authorities. g. Publication of policy required. The department shall publish on its website its policy regarding requests for information from federal immigration authorities. § 9-206 Marijuana testing a. The department of probation shall not require individuals on probation to submit to marijuana testing unless a determination is made, based on an individual's history and personal circumstances, that abstinence from marijuana is necessary to otherwise lead an otherwise law-abiding life. § 9-207 Local conditional release commission. There is hereby established a local conditional release commission. Such commission shall have the powers, duties, and composition as set forth in article 12 of the correction law or any successor statute. § 9-208 Youth probation report. a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Adjust. The term “adjust” means the process described in section 308.1 of the family court act, or any successor statute. Juvenile delinquent. The term “juvenile delinquent” has the same meaning as described in section 301.2 of the family court act, or any successor statute. b. Within 60 days of June 30, 2025, and no later than 60 days after the end of each quarter thereafter, the department of probation shall submit to the speaker of the council and post on the department of probation’s website a report on the number of cases in the previous quarter in the following categories: 1. Juvenile delinquents under 16 years of age at the time of arrest whose intake cases originated in family court; 2. Juvenile delinquents under 16 years of age at the time of arrest whose intake cases were transferred to family court from the youth part of criminal court; 3. Youth 16 and 17 years of age at the time of arrest whose intake cases originated in family court; and 4. Youth 16 and 17 years of age at the time of arrest whose cases were transferred from the youth part of criminal court to family court. c. The data provided pursuant to subdivision b of this section shall be further disaggregated by the following factors: 1. The number of youth screened for adjustment in family court, and further disaggregated by age at the time of arrest, gender, race, the most serious offense, and age at time of intake; 2. The number of individuals whose cases have been adjusted, and further disaggregated by age at time of arrest, gender, race, the most serious offense, and age at time of intake; 3. The average number of days from an individual’s arrest to adjustment intake interview; 4. The reasons stated for not adjusting an individual, further disaggregated by, gender, race, the most serious offense, and age at the time of arrest; 5. The number of individuals who successfully complete adjustment and have their cases diverted; 6. The number of individuals who are referred from the department of probation to the law department for failure to follow conditions of adjustment; 7. The number of individuals receiving probation services; 8. The number of individuals detained, disaggregated by age at time of arrest, gender, race, the most serious offense, risk level score, and age at the time of risk assessment interview; and 9. The number and percent of dispositional recommendations for placement, disaggregated by age, gender, and race. Chapter 3: Office of Criminal Justice § 9-301 Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Charge. The term charge means the most serious offense charged or alleged in a criminal summons. Criminal summons. The term criminal summons has the same meaning as that in section 14-101. Offense. The term offense has the same meaning as that in section 10.00 of the penal law or any successor provision. Office. The term office means the office of criminal justice as defined in section 13 of the charter or another office or agency designated by the mayor to implement the provisions of this chapter. § 9-302 Bail information in courts. The office or another office or agency designated by the mayor shall make reasonable efforts to work with the office of court administration to promote the availability of complete and accurate information regarding the bail posting process to persons seeking to post bail. Such efforts shall include promoting the display of information regarding posting bail conspicuously in locations in courthouses where such information would assist individuals in posting bail and the direct communication of such information to such persons. Such information shall include how to determine the amount and type of bail ordered and all processes required to post bail, including where and how to post bail. § 9-303 Citywide summons report. The office shall submit a biannual summary of summonses to the council and post such summary to the office's website. This summary shall be submitted within 30 days of January 1 and July 1 of each year. This summary shall include but not be limited to the following information regarding criminal summonses issued during the previous six months: a. The number of criminal summonses, in total and disaggregated by the number and percentage of such summonses issued by each city agency, and further disaggregated by the number and percentage of charges in the following categories: (a) felonies, (b) misdemeanors, and (c) violations or infractions. b. The number and percentage of criminal summonses disaggregated by charge, and further disaggregated by agency. c. The number and percentage of criminal summonses disaggregated by agency, and further disaggregated by charge. § 9-304 Erroneous criminal records. a. It shall be a policy of the office to use best efforts to: 1. Seek a reduction in erroneous criminal and juvenile records, including but not limited to records of arrests that are not associated with a criminal prosecution. 2. Take all practicable measures to identify the root causes of erroneous criminal and juvenile records and propose solutions to address such causes. 3. Seek the existence of efficient processes through which erroneous criminal or juvenile records may be rectified, and that members of the public are made aware of such processes. b. Within 30 days of the beginning of each calendar year, commencing in 2019, the office shall issue an annual report to the mayor and the council, and publish such report on the office's website, regarding actions taken pursuant to this section during the previous calendar year. § 9-305 Outstanding criminal warrants. a. It shall be a policy of the office to make best efforts to: 1. Work with the New York city police department and any relevant state or federal entity to seek the accuracy of records regarding outstanding criminal warrants. 2. Facilitate the reduction of outstanding criminal warrants. 3. Seek access to efficient processes for members of the public to rectify inaccurate criminal warrants. b. No later than February 1, 2019, and every February 1 thereafter, the office shall prepare and submit to the council and post on the office's website an annual report regarding actions taken pursuant to this section for the previous calendar year. Such report shall include, to the extent this information is available, the number of outstanding criminal warrants in the city. § 9-306 Annual reporting on bail and the criminal justice system.* a. Within 90 days of the beginning of each reporting period, the office of criminal justice shall post on its website a report regarding bail and the criminal justice system for the preceding reporting period. The reporting period for paragraphs 1, 3, 14, 15, 34, 35, 36, and 37 of this subdivision is quarterly, the reporting period for paragraphs 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 16 is semi-annually, and the reporting period for paragraphs 17 through 33 is annually. The information required pursuant to paragraphs 34 through 37 of this subdivision must be stored permanently, accessible through the city’s open data web portal, and provided in a format that permits automated processing. For the purposes of this section, any individual incarcerated on multiple charges is deemed to be incarcerated only on the most serious charge, a violent felony is deemed to be more serious than a non-violent felony of the same class, any individual incarcerated on multiple charges of the same severity is deemed to be held on each charge, any individual incarcerated on multiple bail amounts is deemed to be held only on the highest bail amount, any incarcerated individual held on pending criminal charges who has a parole hold is deemed to be held only on the parole hold, any incarcerated individual held on pending criminal charges who has any other hold is deemed to be held only on the pending criminal charges, and any individual incarcerated on multiple cases in which sentence has been imposed on at least one of such cases is deemed to be sentenced. Such report shall contain the following information, for the preceding reporting period or for the most recent reporting period for which such information is available, to the extent such information is available: 1. The average daily population of incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department of correction; 2. The number of incarcerated individuals admitted to the custody of the department of correction during the reporting period who had been sentenced to a definite sentence, the number held on pending criminal charges and the number in any other category; 3. Of the number of incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department of correction on the last Friday of each calendar month of the reporting period, the percentage who had been sentenced to a definite sentence, the percentage held on pending criminal charges and the percentage in any other category; 4. Of the number of incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department of correction on the last Friday of each calendar month of the reporting period held on pending criminal charges, the percentage who were remanded without bail; 5. The number of incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department of correction who were sentenced to a definite sentence during the reporting period of the following length: (a) 1 - 15 days; (b) 16 - 30 days; (c) 31 - 90 days; (d) 91 - 180 days; or (e) more than 180 days; 6. Of the number of incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department of correction on the last Friday of each calendar month of the reporting period who were sentenced to a definite sentence, the percentage of incarcerated individuals whose sentences were of the following lengths: (a) 1 - 15 days; (b) 16 - 30 days; (c) 31 - 90 days; (d) 91 - 180 days; or (e) more than 180 days; 7. The number of incarcerated individuals admitted to the custody of the department of correction during the reporting period on pending criminal charges who were charged with offenses of the following severity: (a) class A felonies; (b) class B or C felonies; (c) class D or E felonies; (d) misdemeanors; or (e) non-criminal charges; 8. Of the number of incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department of correction on the last Friday of each calendar month of the reporting period held on pending criminal charges, the percentage charged with offenses of the following severity: (a) class A felonies; (b) class B or C felonies; (c) class D or E felonies; (d) misdemeanors; or (e) non-criminal charges; 9. The number of incarcerated individuals admitted to the custody of the department of correction during the reporting period on pending criminal charges who were charged with offenses of the following severity: (a) class A felonies disaggregated by offense; (b) violent felonies as defined in section 70.02 of the penal law; (c) non-violent felonies as defined in section 70.02 of the penal law; (d) misdemeanors; or (e) non-criminal charges; 10. Of the number of incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department of correction on the last Friday of each calendar month of the reporting period held on pending criminal charges, the percentage charged with offenses of the following severity: (a) class A felonies disaggregated by offense; (b) violent felonies as defined in section 70.02 of the penal law; (c) non-violent felonies as defined in section 70.02 of the penal law; (d) misdemeanors; or (e) non-criminal charges; 11. Of the number of incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department of correction on the last Friday of each calendar month of the reporting period held on pending criminal charges, the percentage charged with offenses of the following type, including the attempt to commit any of such offenses as defined in article 110 of the penal law: (a) The following crimes as defined in the penal law: (i) misdemeanor larceny as defined in sections 155.25, 140.35 and 165.40, (ii) misdemeanor drug possession as defined in section 220.03, (iii) misdemeanor assault as defined in sections 120.00, 120.14, 120.15, 121.11 and 265.01, (iv) misdemeanor harassment or violation of a court order as defined in sections 215.50 and 240.30, (v) misdemeanor theft of services as defined in section 165.15, (vi) misdemeanor trespass as defined in sections 140.10 and 140.15, (vii) misdemeanor criminal mischief or graffiti as defined in sections 145.00 and 145.60, (viii) misdemeanor sexual crimes as defined in sections 130.52, 130.55 and 135.60, (ix) misdemeanor resisting arrest or obstructing governmental administration as defined in sections 205.30 and 195.05, (x) misdemeanor marijuana possession as defined in sections 221.10 and 221.40, (xi) felony vehicular assault or vehicular manslaughter as defined in sections 120.03, 120.04, 120.04-a, 120.20, 120.25, 125.12, 125.13 and 125.14, (xii) felony assault as defined in sections 120.05, 120.06, 120.07, 120.08, 120.09, 120.10, 120.11, 120.12 and 120.13, (xiii) homicide offenses as defined in sections 125.10, 125.11, 125.15, 125.20, 125.21, 125.22, 125.25, 125.26 and 125.27, (xiv) felony sexual assault as defined in sections 130.25, 130.30, 130.35, 130.40, 130.45, 130.50, 130.53, 130.65, 130.65a, 130.66, 130.67, 130.70, 130.75, 130.80, 130.90, 130.91, 130.95 and 130.96, (xv) kidnapping as defined in sections 135.10, 135.20 and 135.25, (xvi) burglary as defined in sections 140.20, 140.25 and 140.30, (xvii) arson as defined in sections 150.05, 150.10, 150.15 and 150.20, (xviii) robbery, grand larceny and stolen property offenses as defined in sections 155.30, 155.35, 155.40, 155.42, 160.05, 160.10, 160.15, 165.45, 165.50, 165.52 and 165.54, (xix) felony violation of a court order as defined in sections 215.51 and 215.52, (xx) felony drug possession or sale as defined in sections 220.06, 220.09, 220.16, 220.18, 220.21, 220.31, 220.34, 220.39, 220.41, 220.43 and 220.44, and (xxi) firearm or weapons possession as defined in sections 265.01-A, 265.01-B, 265.02, 265.03, 265.04, 265.08, 265.09, 265.11, 265.12, 265.13, 265.14, 265.16, and 265.19; (b) The following crimes as defined in the vehicle and traffic law: (i) driving under the influence of alcohol as defined in section 1192, and (ii) driving with a suspended license as defined in section 511; and (c) The following categories of offense: (i) any violation or non- criminal offense, (ii) any misdemeanor not specifically enumerated in this paragraph, and (iii) any felony not specifically enumerated in this paragraph; 12. The number of incarcerated individuals admitted to the custody of the department of correction during the reporting period on pending criminal charges who were charged with offenses in the categories defined in subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) of paragraph 11 of this subdivision; 13. The number of incarcerated individuals admitted to the custody of the department of correction during the reporting period on pending criminal charges who had bail fixed in the following amounts: (a) $1; (b) $2 - $500; (c) $501 - $1,000; (d) $1,001 - $2,500; (e) $2,501 - $5,000; (f) $5,001 - $10,000; (g) $10,001 - $25,000; (h) $25,001 - $50,000; (i) $50,001 - $100,000; or (j) more than $100,000; 14. Of the number of incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department of correction on the final Friday of each calendar month of the reporting period who were held on pending criminal charges, the percentage who had bail fixed in the following amounts: (a) $1; (b) $2 - $500; (c) $501 - $1,000; (d) $1,001 - $2,500; (e) $2,501 , $5,000; (f) $5,001 - $10,000; (g) $10,001 - $25,000; (h) $25,001 - $50,000; (i) $50,001 - $100,000; or (j) more than $100,000; 15. Of the number of incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department of correction on the final day of the reporting period who were held on pending criminal charges, the percentage who had been incarcerated for the following lengths of time: (a) 1 - 2 days; (b) 3 - 5 days; (c) 6 - 15 days; (d) 16 - 30 days; (e) 31 - 90 days; (f) 91 - 180 days; (g) 180 - 365 days; or (h) more than 365 days; 16. The information in paragraphs 1, 5, 7, 9, 13, 15, 30, 31, 32 and 33 of this subdivision disaggregated by the borough in which the incarcerated individual's case was pending, which data shall be listed separately and shall also be compared to the following crime rates disaggregated by borough: (a) The number of crimes reported per capita; (b) The number of class A felonies and violent felonies as defined in section 70.02 of the penal law reported per capita; (c) The number of arrests per capita for criminal offenses; and (d) The number of arrests for class A felonies and violent felonies as defined in section 70.02 of the penal law per capita; 17. The number of cases in which bail was set at arraignment on a misdemeanor complaint; 18. Of all cases arraigned on a misdemeanor complaint, the percentage in which bail was set; 19. The number of cases in which bail was set at arraignment on a felony complaint; 20. Of all cases arraigned on a felony complaint, the percentage in which bail was set; 21. The number of cases in which bail was posted during any time in which the most serious pending count was a misdemeanor and the defendant failed to appear for at least one court appearance during the reporting period; 22. Of all cases in which bail was posted during any time in which the most serious pending count was a misdemeanor, the percentage in which the defendant failed to appear for at least one court appearance during the reporting period; 23. The number of cases in which bail was posted during any time in which the most serious pending count was a felony and the defendant failed to appear for at least one court appearance during the reporting period; 24. Of all cases in which bail was posted during any time in which the most serious pending count was a felony, the percentage in which the defendant failed to appear for at least one court appearance during the reporting period; 25. The number of cases in which the defendant was released without bail during any time in which the most serious pending count was a misdemeanor and the defendant failed to appear for at least one court appearance during the reporting period; 26. Of all cases in which the defendant was released without bail during any time in which the most serious pending count was a misdemeanor, the percentage in which the defendant failed to appear for at least one court appearance during the reporting period; 27. The number of cases in which the defendant was released without bail during any time in which the most serious pending count was a felony and the defendant failed to appear for at least one court appearance during the reporting period; 28. Of all cases in which the defendant was released without bail during any time in which the most serious pending count was a felony, the percentage in which the defendant failed to appear for at least one court appearance during the reporting period; 29. The number of defendants assigned supervised release at arraignment and the percentage of arraigned defendants who were assigned supervised release; 30. Of all criminal cases in which bail was fixed during the preceding reporting period, the percentage in which the defendant posted bail, in total and disaggregated by the following bail amounts: (a) $1; (b) $2 - $500; (c) $501 - $1,000; (d) $1,001 - $2,500; (e) $2,501 - $5,000; (f) $5,001 - $10,000; (g) $10,001 - $25,000; (h) $25,001 - $50,000; (i) $50,001 - $100,000; or (j) more than $100,000; 31. Of all cases in which the defendant was held in the custody of the department of correction on pending criminal charges for any period of time and in which a disposition was reached during the reporting period, the percentage in which the disposition was as follows: (a) conviction for a class A felony disaggregated by offense; (b) conviction for a violent felony; (c) conviction for a non-violent felony; (d) conviction for a misdemeanor; (e) conviction for a non-criminal offense; (f) charges dismissed or adjourned in contemplation of dismissal; or (g) any other disposition; 32. Of all cases in which the defendant was held in the custody of the department of correction on pending criminal charges during the reporting period for any period of time, the percentage in which the status of the criminal case is as follows: (a) the charges are pending and the defendant was released by posting bail; (b) the charges are pending and the defendant was released by court order; (c) the charges are pending and the defendant was not released; (d) conviction for a violent felony; (e) conviction for a non-violent felony; (f) conviction for a misdemeanor; (g) conviction for a non-criminal offense; (h) charges dismissed or adjourned in contemplation of dismissal; or (i) any other disposition; 33. Of the number of incarcerated individuals in the custody of the department of correction on the last Friday of each calendar month who were held on pending criminal charges during the reporting period, the percentage in which the status of the criminal case on the final day of the reporting period is as follows: (a) the charges are pending and the defendant was released by posting bail; (b) the charges are pending and the defendant was released by court order; (c) the charges are pending and the defendant was not released; (d) conviction for a violent felony; (e) conviction for a non-violent felony; (f) conviction for a misdemeanor; (g) conviction for a non-criminal offense; (h) charges dismissed or adjourned in contemplation of dismissal; or (i) any other disposition; 34. The number of violent felonies filed against individuals who are 16 or 17 years of age in criminal court, in total and disaggregated by age at time of charge, gender, race, county, and most serious offense; 35. The number of violent felonies removed to family court from criminal court, in total and disaggregated by age at time of charge, gender, race, county, and most serious offense; 36. The number of non-violent felonies filed against individuals who are 16 and 17 year of age in criminal court, in total and disaggregated by age at time of charge, gender, race, county, and most serious offense; and 37. The number of non-violent felonies removed to family court from criminal court, in total and disaggregated by age at time of charge, gender, race, county, and most serious offense. b. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, no report required by subdivision a of this section shall contain personally identifiable information. For related unconsolidated provisions. § 9-307 Report on the closure of jails on Rikers Island. a. Beginning on the 30th day of January in the year 2020, the mayor's office of criminal justice shall submit shall submit a biannual report to the council and post to the office's website and the city's open data portal, a progress report on closing jails on Rikers Island and opening jail facilities outside Rikers Island. Such report shall be submitted within 60 days of January 1 and July 1 of each year and shall include information on the following issues: 1. Trends in the jail population and the drivers of population changes, including the following: (a) the average daily population in total and disaggregated by facility, by borough of arrest, and in the following categories: pretrial, sentenced, technical parole violation, pretrial with parole violations, and other; (b) the average and median length of stay of incarcerated individuals detained pretrial, in total and disaggregated by borough of arrest and whether there is a co-occurring parole violations; and (c) the number and percentage of pretrial detainees whose length of stay is longer than 30 days, 90 days, six months, and one year. 2. The total capacity and average daily population of each correctional facility solely operated by the department of correction, disaggregated by facility. 3. The timeline for closure of each correctional facility located on Rikers Island, any significant changes to such timeline, and any significant actions taken by the mayor in response to such changes. 4. The budget for closure, and any significant changes to such budget. 5. The procurement of contracts related to closure and construction of jail facilities, including any relevant timelines. 6. A general overview of the design and construction of new jail facilities and any related information regarding the timelines for the construction of new facilities. 7. Populations relocated as a result of new facility construction. 8. The progress of implementing an electronic management system for individuals in custody. 9. Staff plans, by facility, including but not limited to the following information for the reporting period: the number of uniform and civilian staff hired, the number of uniform and civilian staff terminated, and the number of uniform and civilian staff who left the department for reasons other than termination. b. No information that is required to be reported pursuant to this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable provision of federal, state, or local law relating to the privacy of information. § 9-308 Office of special enforcement reporting. a. Within one month after the calendar year quarter ending December 31, 2019, and within one month of each quarter thereafter, the office shall ensure that the office of special enforcement submits to the council and posts to its website, in a machine readable format, a report on inspections of nightlife establishments overseen by the office of special enforcement. Such reports shall include the following information for each such inspection during the previous quarter: 1. The borough and council district of the inspection. 2. The conduct or complaint that resulted in the inspection, including any relevant 311, 911, department of building, fire department, finance department's sheriff's office, or other form of complaint. 3. The duration of the inspection, including the time the inspection commenced and the time spent inside the establishment. 4. The agencies present for the inspection, including the number of personnel from each agency. 5. Any civil or criminal summonses issued or criminal complaints filed, as defined in section 14-101, as a result of the inspection, as well as the agency responsible for issuing each such summons. 6. Whether the targeted establishment was ordered to cease operations during such inspection, and the duration of such closure. b. The term office of special enforcement means the office of special enforcement, as established under executive order number 96 for the year 2006, or such other agency as the mayor may designate by executive order. § 9-309 District attorney reporting. No later than 90 days from January 1 of each year, starting in 2024, the office shall provide to the council and publish on its website an annual report on district attorneys. This report shall consist of the information required pursuant to section 9-402 aggregated for all district attorneys, to the extent that such information is provided to the office as enumerated in subdivision d of such section, and published in a manner that permits the comparison of such information for such district attorneys. § 9-310 Jail population review. a. Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following term has the following meaning: Covered person. The term “covered person” means a person who has been in the custody of the department of correction for at least seven consecutive days. b. No later than October 1, 2023, the office shall establish a jail population review program that shall conduct a review of covered persons to identify opportunities for early case resolution or pretrial release with any appropriate conditions. The office may implement such program in one or more boroughs, provided that the office shall implement a citywide program by July 1, 2024. c. Review criteria. The jail population review program shall (i) establish criteria for determining whether a case presents opportunities for early case resolution or pretrial release with any appropriate conditions and (ii) review each covered person based on such criteria, to the extent the office has access to the information required by such criteria. To the extent such information is available, the criteria shall include the following: 1. The charges filed against the covered person; 2. The covered person’s criminal history and any previous record with respect to court attendance; 3. Any known physical and mental health conditions; 4. Any known psychosocial conditions contributing to the individual’s circumstances at the time of arrest, including, but not limited to, the individual’s financial stability, mental and emotional health, housing, employment, education, and history of trauma; 5. The treatment needs of the covered person; 6. Any available community-based programming that provides services outside the department of correction; 7. The amount of bail set relative to the covered person’s ability to pay bail; 8. The typical sentence imposed in similar cases; and 9. Any other information the office deems relevant. d. The office shall provide, as early as practicable, all the material information collected during the review to the covered person’s attorney. The office shall not share any confidential information with the district attorney or the court without the consent of the covered person’s attorney. e. Confidentiality. The office shall establish confidentiality protocols for the jail population review program to ensure that all information collected to conduct the individualized review required by this section is collected, maintained, and disclosed in accordance with applicable law and policies. f. Report. The office shall publish on its website and submit to the speaker of the council and the mayor a biannual report submitted within 60 days of January 1 and July 1 of each year. Such report must include the following information, disaggregated by race, age, gender, and any relevant health designations, where such information is available to the office: 1. The number of covered persons who were reviewed; 2. The number of covered persons for whom the review required by this section was completed in (i) zero to 10 days, (ii) 11 to 20 days, or (iii) more than 21 days from the covered person’s date of entry into department of correction custody; 3. The number of covered persons identified as having opportunities for early case resolution or pretrial release with appropriate conditions; 4. The number of covered persons identified in paragraph 3 of this subdivision who were released from incarceration, disaggregated by the disposition or status of such person’s case and the conditions of pretrial release, if any; 5. The number of covered persons identified in paragraph 4 of this subdivision who were subsequently arraigned on a new offense within the prior 6 months. The report shall use an asterisk in place of a number where there are fewer than 5 covered persons in any of the categories identified in paragraphs 1 through 5 of this subdivision. § 9-311 Resource navigator program. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Gender nonconforming. The term “gender nonconforming” means a person whose gender expression differs from gender stereotypes, norms, and expectations in a given culture or historical period. Intersex. The term “intersex” refers to a person whose sex characteristics, including, but not limited to chromosomes, hormones, gonads, and genitalia, do not conform with a binary construction of sex as either male or female. This term may not be the same as a person’s gender identity and is not the same as a person’s sexual orientation. Non-binary. The term “non-binary” refers to a person whose gender identity is not exclusively male or female. Transgender. The term “transgender” refers to a person whose gender identity does not conform to the sex assigned at birth. b. The office shall establish a resource navigator program that shall: 1. Maintain and, as appropriate, update a public database of alternatives to incarceration, transitional housing programs, reentry programs, and reentry services, that serve transgender, gender nonconforming, non-binary and intersex individuals as well cisgender women who are in, or were released from, the custody of the department of correction; such database shall include up-to date information on services offered by these programs, eligibility, and availability; 2. Provide referrals to such programs and services and, as appropriate, conduct follow-up; 3. Provide outreach and education about such programs and services to transgender, gender nonconforming, non-binary and intersex individuals as well as for cisgender women who are in the custody of the department of correction, and, to the extent practicable, district attorneys, criminal defense attorneys who represent indigent persons pursuant to article 18-B of the county law, the office of court administration, the department of correction, and any other relevant agencies; and 4. Make recommendations to the mayor and the council to improve diversion and reentry resources for transgender, gender nonconforming, non- binary and intersex individuals as well as for cisgender women in custody. c. The office shall include formerly incarcerated persons in the administration of the resource navigator program, to the extent practicable. § 9-312 Civil service examinations. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term “justice-involved individual” means an individual who has been arrested, prosecuted, or incarcerated. b. The office shall provide all city-contracted programs that serve justice-involved individuals with information regarding civil service examinations administered by the department of citywide administrative services and information regarding the civil service appointment process. The office, in coordination with the department of citywide administrative services, shall immediately forward all civil service examination announcements to such contracted programs upon receipt of information regarding such civil service examinations from such department. Chapter 4: District Attorneys § 9-401 Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Charge severity. The term charge severity means whether a top charge is a felony, misdemeanor, violation, or traffic infraction. Conviction severity. The term conviction severity means whether a charge of conviction is a felony, misdemeanor, violation, or traffic infraction. Disposition. The term disposition means any instance in which a prosecution results in a dismissal, adjournment in contemplation of dismissal, or judgment of conviction. Incarcerated. The term incarcerated means a defendant who is detained by the department of correction, the police department, the administration for children's services, or the New York state department of corrections and community supervision pursuant to article 510 of the criminal procedure law, but who has not been deemed an incapacitated person under article 730 of the criminal procedure law. Office. The term office means the office of any district attorney in the city of New York. Program. The term program means any pretrial diversion, treatment, alternative to incarceration, or other intervention that a defendant enters into outside the custody of the department of correction. Prosecute. The term prosecute means to file an accusatory instrument. Supervised release or release under supervision. The term supervised release means any instance in which a criminal defendant is released from custody during the pendency of a prosecution under the condition that such defendant maintain contact with an entity or individual that provides monitoring or supervision or otherwise mandatory programming during such release. Top charge. The term top charge refers to the charge that carries the longest potential period of incarceration filed in an accusatory instrument, or, if an accusatory instrument is not filed, the term top charge means the charge that carries the longest potential period of incarceration referred for prosecution. § 9-402 Reporting. a. Each office shall submit an annual report to the council and the office of criminal justice, and post such report on such office's website. Such reports shall be submitted within 60 days of January 1 each year, starting in 2024, and shall include the following information for criminal prosecutions during the previous calendar year: 1. The number of cases prosecuted in total and disaggregated by: (a) charge severity, and felony charges shall be further disaggregated by whether such charges are for a violent felony; (b) top charge; (c) the race, gender, and age of the person prosecuted and (d) police precinct. 2. The number of cases resulting in a conviction, in total and disaggregated by: (a) conviction severity; and felony charges shall be further disaggregated by whether such conviction was for a violent felony; (b) charge or charges of conviction; (c) the race, gender, and age of the person prosecuted; (d) method through which the conviction was obtained, in the following categories: plea bargain, trial by judge, or trial by jury; and (e) police precinct. 3. The number and percentage of cases referred for prosecution for which the office does not prosecute, in total and disaggregated by top charge and charge severity, and also disaggregated by the race, gender, and age of the person that is not prosecuted. The information reported in this paragraph shall not include cases referred for prosecution for which the office does not prosecute because the individual referred for prosecution participated in a program in lieu of prosecution. 4. The number and percentage of cases referred for prosecution for which the office does not prosecute because the individual referred for prosecution participated in a program in lieu of prosecution, in total, and by type of program, and disaggregated by top charge and charge severity, and also disaggregated by the race, gender, and age of the person that is not prosecuted. This information should include the number of cases in which a defendant was recommended to participate in a program in lieu of prosecution but then failed to successfully complete such program. 5. The number of and percentage of prosecutions eligible for bail or remand in which the office requests bail or remand at a criminal court arraignment and the requested amount, and, the number and percentage of such prosecutions in which bail or remand is so imposed and the amount imposed, not including any prosecution in which nominal bail is requested by the defense pursuant to subdivision 5 of section 530.40 of the criminal procedure law or any successor statute, in total and disaggregated by the race, gender, and age of the person prosecuted, and the amount of bail requested by the prosecution and the amount imposed. 6. The number and percentage of prosecutions in which the district attorney office recommended supervised release or release under supervision at a criminal court arraignment, and the number and percentage of such cases in which supervised release or release under supervision is so imposed, in total and disaggregated by whether such prosecutions were eligible for electronic monitoring, bail or remand, and also disaggregated by the race, gender, and age of the person prosecuted. 7. The number and percentage of all prosecutions, prosecutions in which felony complaints are filed, prosecutions disposed in supreme court, and prosecutions in which misdemeanor complaints are filed, that were disposed in the following categories: dismissal on the motion of the district attorney, dismissal on speedy trial grounds, acquittal at trial, dismissal on other grounds, adjournment in contemplation of dismissal, conviction for a violation, conviction for a traffic infraction, conviction for a misdemeanor, conviction for a felony, and any other outcome in total and disaggregated by: (a) whether bail was requested; (b) whether bail or remand was imposed, and for bail in what amount and what forms; (c) whether conviction was secured through a plea bargain; (d) whether the person was incarcerated at the time of disposition; (e) the precinct of arrest; and (f) race, gender, and age of the person prosecuted. 8. The number and percentage of prosecutions, in total and disaggregated by both charge severity and conviction severity, disposed at the following times: criminal court arraignment, supreme court arraignment, between criminal court arraignment and before pretrial evidentiary hearings, between supreme court arraignment and before pretrial evidentiary hearings, after pretrial evidentiary hearings were commenced and before trial, and after trial. 9. The average time between initial arraignment and disposition, in total and disaggregated by charge severity and conviction severity, and also disaggregated by: (a) Charge severity, with felony charges further disaggregated by whether such charges are violent felonies as defined in article 70 of the penal law; (b) Whether the defendant was incarcerated at any time during the pendency of the case, disaggregated by whether such person was released from such incarceration at any point during the pendency of the case; and (c) Whether the defendant participated in a program during such period. 10. The number of cases in which there was a failure to turn over evidence prior to a plea offer and the number of instances in which sanctions were imposed as a result. 11. Sentences imposed, in total and disaggregated by charge severity, conviction severity, age, race, gender, and method by which conviction was obtained, in the following categories: determinate period of imprisonment, indeterminate period of imprisonment, definite period of imprisonment, conditional discharge, probation, fine, and time served. In any case in which a fine is imposed in addition to another sentence, the report shall include only such other sentence. Sentences of conditional discharges shall be listed in total and disaggregated by type of condition imposed in the following categories: program attendance, community service, or other type of condition. 12. The number of prosecutions that result in trials, disaggregated by bench trials and jury trials, top charge, and race, age and gender. b. All terms used in this section that are not defined in section 9-401 have the same meanings as they have in the penal law or criminal procedure law, where applicable. All reporting requiring disaggregation by age shall be reported in the following categories: 17 and below; 18 - 24, 25 - 29, 30 - 39, 40 - 49, 50 - 59, 60 - 69, and 70 years old and up. All reporting requiring disaggregation by race shall be reported in the following categories: Asian, Black, Hispanic, Other, and White. c. Reports required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall be stored permanently and accessible from each office's website, and shall be provided in a format that permits automated processing. d. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this section: 1. If any office is unable to comply with some or all of the provisions of this section, such office shall comply with the provisions with which such office is capable of complying. In any such instance of an inability to comply, such office shall provide written notice of such inability to the mayor and speaker of the council within 60 days of the date the reports required pursuant to subdivision a of this section are required to be submitted. Such notice shall contain a description of the provisions with which such office is unable to comply, why such office is unable to comply with each such provision, and what specific efforts are being taken to bring such office into compliance for future reports. Such notice may also contain recommendations for amendment of any provision of this section if such office anticipates that the inability to comply is likely to continue for the report to be submitted in 2025 regarding calendar year 2024, together with specific reasons for such anticipated continued inability. 2. Full compliance with the provisions of subdivisions a, b, and c of this section shall be required for the report to be submitted in 2025 regarding calendar year 2024. 

Title 10: Public Safety. Chapter 1: Public Safety § 10-101 Communication of alarms. The owners and proprietors of all manufactories, hotels, tenement houses, apartment houses, office buildings, boarding and lodging-houses, warehouses, stores and offices, theatres and music halls, and the authorities or persons having charge of all hospitals and asylums, and of the public schools and other public buildings, churches and other places where large numbers of persons are congregated for purposes of worship, instruction or amusement, and all piers, bulkheads, wharves, pier sheds, bulkhead sheds or other waterfront structures, shall provide such means of communicating alarms of accident or danger to the police department, as the police commissioner may prescribe. § 10-102 Permit for equipping automobiles with radio receiving sets capable of receiving signals on frequencies allocated for police use; fee. a. It shall be unlawful for any person to equip an automobile with a radio receiving set capable of receiving signals on the frequencies allocated for police use, or use or possess an automobile so equipped, without a permit issued by the police commissioner, in his or her discretion, and in accordance with such regulations as the commissioner may prescribe. Such permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked by the commissioner, and shall not be transferred from the vehicle in which it was installed at the time the license was issued. The annual fee shall be twenty- five dollars for each automobile so equipped. A permit may be renewed upon the payment of a like sum and under like conditions. b. The police commissioner is authorized, in his or her discretion, to issue permits for radio receiving sets capable of receiving signals on the frequencies allocated to police use to employees of federal, state and municipal bureaus and departments without requiring the payment of the annual fee herein provided. c. Violations. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than twenty- five dollars, or imprisonment for thirty days, or both. § 10-103 Use of devices to decode coded police transmission via radio or television prohibited. a. It shall be unlawful in the city of New York for any person to unscramble or decode or possess or use any instrument or article capable of unscrambling or decoding, scrambled or coded police broadcasts by radio or television, unless such person is duly authorized to do so by permit issued by the police commissioner of the city of New York. b. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. § 10-104 Suppression of gaming and other houses. If any two or more householders shall report in writing, over their signatures, to the police commissioner or to a deputy police commissioner, that there are good grounds, stating the same, for believing any house, room or premises within the city to be kept or used as a common gambling-house, common gaming- room, or common gaming premises, for playing for wagers of money at any game of chance therein, or to be kept or used for lewd and obscene purposes or amusements, or the deposit or sale of lottery tickets or lottery policies, it shall be lawful for the police commissioner or either of the commissioner's deputies to authorize, in writing, any member or members of the force to enter the same who may forthwith arrest all persons there found offending against law, but none other; and seize all implements of gaming or lottery policies, and convey any person so arrested before a judge of the criminal court, and bring the articles so seized to the office of the property clerk. It shall be the duty of such police commissioner or deputy police commissioner to cause such arrested person to be rigorously prosecuted, and such articles seized to be destroyed, as the orders, rules and regulations of the commissioner shall direct. § 10-105 Duties re-elections. It shall be the duty of the police force, or any member thereof, to prevent any booth, or box, or structure for the distribution of tickets at any election from being erected or maintained within one hundred fifty feet of any polling place within the city, and summarily to remove any such booth, box or structure, or to close and prevent the use thereof. § 10-106 Reporting and depositing lost money or property. a. Any person who finds any lost money or property of or exceeding the value of ten dollars shall report such finding to and deposit such money or property in a police station house within ten days after the finding thereof. Such money or property shall thereupon be transmitted to the property clerk who shall make entry of such deposit in his or her records. Such money or property as shall remain in the custody of the property clerk for a period of three months without a lawful claimant entitled thereto shall be turned over to the person who found and deposited the same. If the person who so found and deposited such money or property shall not appear and claim the same within thirty days after notice by registered mail of the expiration of said three months' period, such money or property shall, in the case of money, be paid into the general fund of the city established pursuant to section one hundred nine of the charter, and in the case of property be sold at public auction after having been advertised in the City Record for a period of ten days and the proceeds of such sale shall be paid into such fund. b. Any person who shall violate, or refuse, or neglect to comply with any provision of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both. § 10-107 Yellow flashing lights on volunteer emergency vehicles. a. Definitions. 1. Volunteer vehicles. Any commercial or privately owned non- commercial vehicle, the owner or operator of which is enrolled as a member of a duly recognized organization whose function is to volunteer assistance to the New York city police department in the patrolling of New York city roadways. 2. Assistance. Serving in any highway patrol activity to keep traffic moving, direct traffic around accidents, check on stalled cars. b. Regulation. A flashing yellow light which must be revolving, rotating, flashing, oscillating or constantly moving light, may be affixed to a duly recognized volunteer vehicle, and such light may be displayed on such recognized volunteer vehicle when said vehicle is engaged in rendering assistance. § 10-108 Regulation of sound devices or apparatus. a. Legislative declaration. It is hereby declared that the use or operation of any radio device or apparatus or any device or apparatus for the amplification of sounds from any radio, phonograph or other sound-making or sound-producing device, or any device or apparatus for the reproduction or amplification of the human voice or other sounds, in front of or outside of any building, place or premises, or in or through any window, doorway or opening of such building, place or premises, abutting or adjacent to a public street, park or place, or in or upon any vehicle operated, standing or being in or upon any public street, park or place, where the sounds therefrom may be heard upon any public street, park or place, or from any stand, platform or other structure, or from any airplane or other device used for flying, flying over the city, or on a boat or on the waters within the jurisdiction of the city, or anywhere on or in the public streets, parks or places, is detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the city, in that such use or operation diverts the attention of pedestrians and vehicle operators in the public streets, parks and places, thus increasing traffic hazards and causing injury to life and limb. It is hereby further declared that such use or operation disturbs the public peace and comfort and the peaceful enjoyment by the people of their rights to use the public streets, parks and places for street, park and other public purposes and disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants. Therefore, it is hereby declared as a matter of legislative determination that the prohibition of such use or operation for commercial or business advertising purposes and the proper regulation of such use and operation for all other purposes is essential to protect the health, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the city, to secure the health, safety, comfort, convenience, and peaceful enjoyment by the people of their rights to use the public streets, parks and places for street, park and other public purposes and to secure the peace, quiet and comfort of the city's inhabitants. It is hereby further declared as a matter of legislative determination that the expense of supervising and regulating the use and operation of such sound devices and apparatus for purposes other than commercial and business advertising purposes should be borne by the persons using or operating such devices and apparatus and that the requirement of a nominal fee for the issuance of a permit for such use and operation as hereinafter prescribed is intended to defray the expenses of regulating such use or operation for the health, welfare and safety of all the people. b. Definitions. As used in this section: 1. The term public holidays shall mean those days expressly set forth in section twenty-four of the general construction law. 2. The term sound device or apparatus shall mean any radio device or apparatus, or any device or apparatus for the amplification of any sounds from any radio, phonograph, or other sound-making or sound-producing device, or any device or apparatus for the reproduction or amplification of the human voice or other sounds; 3. The phrase to use or operate any sound device or apparatus in, on, near or adjacent to any public street, park or place, shall mean to use or operate or cause to be used or operated any sound device or apparatus in front or outside of any building, place or premises, or in or through any window, doorway or opening of such building, place or premises, abutting on or adjacent to a public street, park or place, or in or upon any vehicle operated, standing or being in or on any public street, park or place, where the sounds therefrom may be heard upon any public street, park or place, or from any stand, platform or other structure, or from any other airplane or other device used for flying, flying over the city, or on a boat or on the waters within the jurisdiction of the city, or anywhere on the public streets, parks or places. c. Use and operation of the sound devices and apparatus for commercial and business advertising purposes. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any sound device or apparatus in, on, near or adjacent to any public street, park or place, for commercial and business advertising purpose. d. Use and operation of sound devices and apparatus for other than commercial and business advertising purposes; permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any sound device or apparatus, in, on, near or adjacent to any public street, park or place, unless such person shall have first obtained a permit to be issued by the police commissioner in the manner hereinafter prescribed and unless the police commissioner shall comply with the provisions of this section and the terms and conditions prescribed in such permit. e. Applications. Each applicant for a permit to use or operate a sound device or apparatus in, on, near or adjacent to any public street, park or place shall file a written application with the police commissioner, at the police precinct covering the area in which such sound device or apparatus is to be used or operated, at least five days prior to the date upon which such sound device or apparatus is to be used or operated. Such application shall describe the specific location in which such sound device or apparatus is proposed to be used or operated, the day and the hour or hours during which it is proposed to be used or operated, the volume of sound which is proposed to be used measured by decibels or by any other efficient method of measuring sound, and such other pertinent information as the police commissioner may deem necessary to enable the police commissioner to carry out the provisions of this section. f. Issuance of permit; terms. The police commissioner shall not deny a permit for any specific time, location or use, to any applicant who complies with the provisions of this section, except for one or more of the reasons specified in subdivision g hereof or for non-payment of the fee prescribed in subdivision h hereof, or to prevent overlapping in the granting of permits, provided, however, that a permit issued for multiple days shall be issued only for multiple days within a period of five consecutive calendar days and only at the same location. Each permit issued pursuant to this section shall describe the specific location in which such sound device or apparatus may be used or operated thereunder, the exact period of time for which such apparatus or device may be operated in such location, the maximum volume of sound which may be employed in such use or operation and such other terms and conditions as may be necessary, for the purpose of securing the health, safety, comfort, convenience and peaceful enjoyment by the people of their right to use the public streets, parks or places for street, park or other public purposes, protecting the health, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and securing the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants. g. Special restrictions. The police commissioner shall not issue any permit for the use of a sound device or apparatus: 1. In any location within five hundred feet of a school, courthouse or church, during the hours of school, court or worship, respectively, or within five hundred feet of any hospital or similar institution; 2. In any location where the commissioner, upon investigation, shall determine that the conditions of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or both are such that the use of such a device or apparatus will constitute a threat to the safety of pedestrians or vehicular operators; 3. In any location where the commissioner, upon investigation, shall determine that conditions of overcrowding or of street repair or other physical conditions are such that the use of a sound device or apparatus will deprive the public of the right to the safe, comfortable, convenient and peaceful enjoyment of any public street, park or place for street, park or other public purposes, or will constitute a threat to the safety of pedestrians or vehicle operators; 4. In or on any vehicle or other device while it is in transit; 5. Between the hours of ten p.m. and nine a.m.; or 6. Between the hours of eight p.m. or sunset, whichever is later, and nine a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of eight p.m. or sunset, whichever is later, and ten a.m. on weekends and public holidays, in any location within fifty feet of any building that is lawfully occupied for residential use. The distance of fifty feet shall be measured in a straight line from the point on the exterior wall of such building nearest to any point in the location for which the permit is sought. h. Fees. Each applicant for a single-day permit issued under the provisions of this section shall pay a fee of forty-five dollars for the use of each such sound device or apparatus and each applicant for a multiple-day permit issued under the provisions of this section shall pay a fee of forty- five dollars for the use of each such sound device or apparatus for the first day and a fee of five dollars for the use of each such sound device or apparatus for each additional day up to a maximum of four additional days, provided, however, that permits for the use of such sound devices or apparatus shall be issued to any bureau, commission, board or department of the United States government, the state of New York, and the city of New York, without fee. i. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the use or operation of any sound device or apparatus by any church or synagogue on or within its own premises, in connection with the religious rites or ceremonies of such church or synagogue. j. Violations. 1. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars or imprisonment for thirty days, or both. 2. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section, any rule promulgated pursuant thereto or the terms of a permit issued pursuant to subdivision f of this section, shall be liable for a civil penalty recoverable in a civil action brought in the name of the police commissioner or the commissioner of environmental protection or in a proceeding before the environmental control board in an amount of two hundred fifty dollars for the first violation, five hundred dollars for the second violation and seven hundred fifty dollars for the third and each subsequent violation. However, any person who commits a fourth and any subsequent violation within a period of six months shall be classified as a persistent violator and shall be liable for a civil penalty of one thousand dollars for each such violation. k. Rules. The police commissioner shall have the power to make such rules as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. l. The police department and the department of environmental protection shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this section. § 10-110 Processions and parades. a. Permits. A procession, parade, or race shall be permitted upon any street or in any public place only after a written permit therefor has been obtained from the police commissioner. Application for such permit shall be made in writing, upon a suitable form prescribed and furnished by the department, not less than thirty-six hours previous to the forming or marching of such procession, parade or race. The commissioner shall, after due investigation of such application, grant such permit subject to the following restrictions: 1. It shall be unlawful for the police commissioner to grant a permit where the commissioner has good reason to believe that the proposed procession, parade or race will be disorderly in character or tend to disturb the public peace; 2. It shall be unlawful for the police commissioner to grant a permit for the use of any street or any public place, or material portion thereof, which is ordinarily subject to great congestion or traffic and is chiefly of a business or mercantile character, except, upon loyalty day, or upon those holidays or Sundays when places of business along the route proposed are closed, or on other days between the hours of six thirty post meridian and nine ante meridian; 3. Each such permit shall designate specifically the route through which the procession, parade or race shall move, and it may also specify the width of the roadway to be used, and may include such rules and regulations as the police commissioner may deem necessary; 4. Special permits for occasions of extraordinary public interest, not annual or customary, or not so intended to be, may be granted by the commissioner for any street or public place, and for any day or hour, with the written approval of the mayor; 5. The chief officer of any procession, parade or race, for which a permit may be granted by the police commissioner, shall be responsible for the strict observance of all rules and regulations included in said permit. b. Exemptions. This section shall not apply: 1. To the ordinary and necessary movements of the United States army, United States navy, national guard, police department and fire department; or 2. To such portion of any street as may have already been, or may hereafter be duly, set aside as a speedway; or 3. To processions or parades which have marched annually upon the streets for more than ten years, previous to July seventh, nineteen hundred fourteen. c. Violations. Every person participating in any procession, parade or race, for which a permit has not been issued when required by this section, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than twenty- five dollars, or by imprisonment for not exceeding ten days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. § 10-111 Unattended vehicles. a. It shall be unlawful for any person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle to permit it to stand unattended on the streets or thoroughfares of the city, without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and, where the ignition is locked or unlocked by a key or other device, removing such key or other device. b. Violations. Any person who violates the provisions of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars or imprisonment not to exceed two days, or both. Whenever a police officer shall find a motor vehicle standing in violation of this provision, the officer may stop the engine and/or remove the ignition key or device therefrom and, in the event that the owner or operator thereof is not present, shall deliver the ignition key or device to the nearest patrol precinct station house within one hour after removing same to be held for and returned to such owner or operator. In the event the key or device is so delivered to a station house, the officer shall attach to the vehicle a tag stating where the ignition key or device may be reclaimed. c. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person driving or in charge of a utility vehicle regulated by the New York state public service commission when the engine is used to operate a processing device and the wheels on the vehicle are chocked and an emergency brake is applied to secure the vehicle in place. § 10-112 Parking of trailers in vacant lots. It shall be unlawful to park any automobile trailer or house car for living or sleeping purposes in any vacant lot unless the owner or operator of such trailer or house car shall have obtained the written permission of the owner of such vacant lot and there has been full compliance with the provisions of the health code. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. § 10-113 Parking of motor vehicles in vacant lots. It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle in any vacant lot for which a driveway across the sidewalk has not been authorized pursuant to the provisions of the code. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section and the owner of any motor vehicle parked in violation of this section by any person using the same with the permission, express or implied, of said owner, shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not to exceed fifty dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed ten days or by both such fine and imprisonment. The provisions of this section shall not apply to parking lots or parking spaces referred to in section 20-322 of the code. An appearance ticket charging violation of this section may be issued and served pursuant to the provisions of article one hundred fifty of the criminal procedure law. § 10-114 Street shows. a. It shall be unlawful to give any exhibition of climbing or scaling on the front or exterior of any house or building. b. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person, from any window or open space of any house, or building, to exhibit to the public upon the street, or the sidewalk thereof, any performance of puppet or other figures, ballet or other dancing, comedy, farce, show with moving figures, play or other entertainment. c. Violations. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than twenty- five dollars, or imprisonment for thirty days, or both. § 10-115 Solicitation of pedestrians by pullers-in. a. It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, or cause or permit any person to stand on the sidewalk or street in front of, or in the entrance or hallway of any store or building for the purpose of calling the attention of passersby to goods, wares or merchandise displayed or on sale in such store or any other store or building, or to solicit patronage for any business or service, or to attempt by word of mouth or gesture, or by the distribution of handbills or other printed matter, or by the use of mechanical or sound making devices, to entice or persuade passersby to enter such store or building, or any other store or building, or to accept the services of any business. b. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more then fifty dollars, imprisonment for not exceeding ten days, or both. § 10-116 Damaging houses of religious worship or religious articles therein prohibited. Any person who willfully and without authority breaks, defaces or otherwise damages any house of religious worship or any portion thereof, or any appurtenances thereto, including religious figures or religious monuments, or any book, scroll, ark, furniture, ornaments, musical instrument, article of silver or plated ware, or any other chattel contained therein for use in connection with religious worship, or any person who knowingly aids, abets, conceals or in any way assists any such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than one year or by a fine of not more than $2,500 nor less than $1,000, or both. In addition, any person violating this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $25,000. Such civil penalty shall be in addition to any criminal penalty or sanction that may be imposed, and such civil penalty shall not limit or preclude any cause of action available to any person or entity aggrieved by any of the acts prohibited by this section. § 10-117 Defacement of property, possession, sale and display of aerosol spray paint cans, broad tipped markers and etching acid prohibited in certain instances. a. No person shall write, paint or draw any inscription, figure or mark or affix, attach or place by whatever means a sticker or decal of any type on any public or private building or other structure or any other real or personal property owned, operated or maintained by a public benefit corporation, the city of New York or any agency or instrumentality thereof or by any person, firm, or corporation, or any personal property maintained on a city street or other city-owned property pursuant to a franchise, concession or revocable consent granted by the city, unless the express permission of the owner or operator of the property has been obtained. a-1. For purposes of this section, property of another shall mean all property, including real property, that is not owned, rented, or leased by a person; provided that such term shall not include a location that serves as such person's residence. a-2. For purposes of this section, educational facility shall mean any building affiliated with an institution that maintains a list of enrolled students and is used for educational purposes for more than twelve (12) hours per week for more than six (6) students. b. No person shall possess an aerosol spray paint can, broad tipped indelible marker or etching acid with the intent to violate the provisions of subdivision a of this section. c. No person shall sell or offer to sell an aerosol spray paint can, broad tipped indelible marker or etching acid to any person under twenty-one years of age. c-1. No person under twenty-one years of age shall possess an aerosol spray paint can, broad tipped indelible marker or etching acid in or on the property of another. This subdivision shall not be deemed to prohibit the possession of an aerosol spray paint can, broad tipped indelible marker or etching acid where such item is contained in a manufacturer-sealed package or completely enclosed in a locked container, which shall include bags, backpacks, briefcases and other containers that can be closed and secured with a key or combination lock. c-2. This section shall not apply to any person possessing an aerosol spray paint can, broad tipped indelible marker or etching acid while in or on the property of another in violation of subdivision c-1 of this section, where: (1) the owner, operator or other person having control of the property, building or facility consented in writing to the use or possession of the aerosol spray paint can, broad tipped indelible marker or etching acid; or (2) such person uses or possesses the aerosol spray paint can, broad tipped indelible marker or etching acid under the supervision of the owner or person in control of such property; or (3) such person is at his or her place of employment and the aerosol spray paint can, broad tipped indelible marker or etching acid was, will be or is being used during the course of such employment and used only with written permission from, or under the supervision of his or her employer or such employer's agent; or (4) such person is at an educational facility and uses or will use the aerosol spray paint can, broad tipped indelible marker or etching acid at the educational facility, where he or she is enrolled, and is participating in a class at the educational facility that requires the use or possession of such items; or (5) such person is on the property of another and uses or will use the aerosol spray paint can, broad tipped indelible marker or etching acid in or on the property of another if such use or possession is necessary to participate in a government-sponsored function or in other circumstances where a government agency gives its consent to such use or possession. d. All persons who sell or offer for sale aerosol spray paint cans, broad tipped indelible markers or etching acid shall not place such cans, markers or etching acid on display and may display only facsimiles of such cans, markers or etching acid containing no paint, ink or etching acid. e. For the purpose of this section, the term broad tipped indelible marker shall mean any felt tip marker or similar implement containing a fluid that is not water soluble and which has a flat or angled writing surface one- half inch or greater. For the purpose of this section, the term etching acid shall mean any liquid, cream, paste or similar chemical substance that can be used to etch, draw, carve, sketch, engrave, or otherwise alter, change or impair the physical integrity of glass or metal. f. Any person who violates the provisions of paragraph a of this section shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment of not more than one year, or both. Any person who violates the provisions of paragraph b of this section shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or a term of imprisonment of not more than three months, or both. Any person who violates the provisions of paragraphs c or d of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or imprisonment of not more than three months, or both. Any person who has been previously convicted of violating the provisions of paragraphs c or d of this section shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment of not more than one year, or both. Any person who violates the provisions of paragraph c-1 of this section shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars or imprisonment of not more than fifteen days, or both. When a person is convicted of an offense defined in subdivision a or b of this section, or of an attempt to commit such offense, and the sentence imposed by the court for such conviction includes a sentence of probation or conditional discharge, the court shall, where appropriate, include as a condition of such sentence the defendant's successful participation in a graffiti removal program pursuant to paragraph (h) of subdivision two of section 65.10 of the penal law. g. In addition to the criminal penalties imposed pursuant to subdivision f of this section, a person who violates the provisions of subdivision a, b, c or d of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars for each violation which may be recovered in a proceeding before the environmental control board. Any person who has been previously convicted of violating the provisions of subdivision a, b, c or d of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars for each violation which may be recovered in a proceeding before the environmental control board. Such proceeding shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable before such board. Anyone found to have violated the provisions of subdivision a of this section, by affixing, attaching or placing by whatever means a sticker or decal, in addition to any penalty imposed, shall be responsible for the cost of the removal of the unauthorized stickers or decals. h. In addition to police officers, officers and employees of the department of consumer and worker protection, sanitation, environmental protection and transportation shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this section and may issue notices of violation, appearance tickets or summonses for violations thereof. i. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the person whose name, telephone number, or other identifying information appears on any sticker or decal affixed, attached or placed by whatever means in violation of subdivision a of this section violated this section by either (i) affixing, attaching or placing by whatever means such sticker or decal or (ii) directing, suffering or permitting a servant, agent, employee or other individual under such persons control to engage in such activity. j. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that if a telephone number that appears on any sticker or decal affixed, attached or placed by whatever means in violation of subdivision a of this section belongs to a telephone answering service and no other telephone number or address is readily obtainable to locate the person or business advertised therein, such telephone answering service shall be held liable for a violation of subdivision a in accordance with the provisions of this section. k. The commissioner of the department of sanitation shall be authorized to issue subpoenas to obtain official telephone records for the purpose of determining the identity and location of any person or entity reasonably believed by the commissioner to have violated subdivision a of this section by affixing, attaching or placing by whatever means a sticker or decal. l. For the purposes of imposing a criminal fine or civil penalty pursuant to this section, every sticker or decal affixed, attached or placed by whatever means in violation of subdivision a of this section, shall be deemed to be the subject of a separate violation for which a separate criminal fine or civil penalty shall be imposed. § 10-117.1 Anti-graffiti task force. Repealed. § 10-117.2 Rewards for providing information leading to apprehension, prosecution or conviction of a person for crimes involving graffiti vandalism. The mayor, upon the recommendation of the police commissioner, shall be authorized to offer and pay a reward in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars to any person who provides information leading to the apprehension, prosecution or conviction of any person who may have violated the provisions of subdivision a or b of section 10-117 of this chapter, or who may have committed any other crime where the unlawful conduct included the conduct described in subdivision a or b of such section. No police officer, peace officer or any other law enforcement officer, and no officer, official or employee of the city of New York shall be entitled, directly or indirectly, to collect or receive any such reward. § 10-117.3 Remedies for failure to remove graffiti from certain premises. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Graffiti means any letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing or other mark of any kind visible to the public from a public place that is drawn, painted, chiseled, scratched, or etched on a commercial building or residential building, or any portion thereof, including fencing, that is not consented to by the owner of the commercial building or residential building. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that such letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing or other mark of any kind is not consented to by the owner. Such presumption may be rebutted by the owner informing the city that the owner consents to the marking and intends that it remain on the building. 2. Commercial building means any building that is used, or any building a portion of which is used, for buying, selling or otherwise providing goods or services, or for other lawful business, commercial, professional services or manufacturing activities. 3. Residential building means any building containing one or more dwelling units. 4. Public place means a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access including, but not limited to, any highway, street, road, sidewalk, parking area, plaza, shopping area, place of amusement, playground, park, beach or transportation facility. b. Duty to keep property free of graffiti. The owner of every commercial building and residential building shall keep and cause to be kept such building free of all graffiti. c. Availability of city funds; graffiti removal. Subject to the availability of annual appropriations, an agency or agencies designated by the mayor shall provide graffiti removal services to abate graffiti on commercial buildings and residential buildings without charge to the property owner. The owner of any commercial or residential building may request that such agency or agencies remove or conceal graffiti from such building through the city's graffiti removal services. d. Notification to owner of nuisance. If the owner of a commercial or residential building is in violation of subdivision b of this section, the city shall notify the owner of such building that the building has been determined to be a nuisance and that, after thirty-five days from the date of such notice, or after fifty days from the date of such notice if such owner has requested an extension within the initial thirty-five day period, unless such owner abates the nuisance by removing or concealing the graffiti and notifies the city of such abatement or informs the city that the owner consents to the marking and intends that it remain on the building, the owner shall be deemed to have given permission to the city and/or its contractors or agents to enter or access the property and use the means it determines appropriate to abate the nuisance by removing or concealing the graffiti. Such permission shall not be deemed to include permission to enter any commercial or residential building. e. Content of notice. 1. The notice that the property has been determined to be a nuisance as a result of graffiti on such property shall be provided (a) to the owner of a commercial or residential building by mailing a copy of such notice to the address of such building, if any, appearing in the latest assessment roll, (b) to the owner of record at the address provided by such owner to the commissioner of finance for communications from the commissioner of finance, and (c) if the address filed with the department of housing preservation and development in compliance with article two of subchapter four of chapter two of title twenty-seven of this code is different than the addresses described in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph, to the person registered with the department of housing preservation and development as the owner or agent of the premises, at the address filed with such department in compliance with article two of subchapter four of chapter two of title twenty-seven of this code. 2. Such written notice shall, at a minimum: (a) describe the city's graffiti removal services; (b) identify the property that has become a nuisance; (c) indicate that, if an owner, within thirty-five days of the date of such notice, or within fifty days of the date of such notice if such owner has requested an extension within the initial thirty-five day period, fails: (i) to abate the nuisance by removing or concealing the graffiti and to notify the city of such abatement, or (ii) to inform the city that the owner consents to the marking and intends that it remain on the building, the city and/or its contractors or agents may enter or access the property and use the means it determines appropriate to abate the nuisance by removing or concealing the graffiti; (d) indicate the method by which an owner may contact the city for the purpose of conveying any information or making any request in accordance with subdivision d of this section; and (e) provide a telephone number for the owner to call with any questions regarding the city's graffiti removal services. f. Removal of graffiti by the city. 1. If an owner, within thirty-five days of the date of notice provided pursuant to subdivision d of this section, or within fifty days of the date of such notice if such owner has requested an extension within the initial thirty- five day period, fails to abate the nuisance by removing or concealing the graffiti and to notify the city of such abatement, or to inform the city that the owner consents to the marking and intends that it remain on the building, the city and/or its contractors or agents may enter or access the property and use the means it determines appropriate to abate the nuisance by removing or concealing the graffiti. 2. In no case shall the city be required to clean, paint, or repair any area more extensive than where the graffiti is located. g. Express permission to enter building. 1. If, after entering or accessing the property pursuant to subdivision f of this section, the city has determined that it is necessary to enter a commercial or residential building in order to provide graffiti removal services, it shall request the express permission of the owner of such building to enter such building for the purpose of providing graffiti removal services. In making such request, the city shall notify the owner of such building that it has determined that it is necessary to enter the building in order to provide graffiti removal services, and that the owner may either (a) grant permission for the city and/or its contractors or agents to enter such building for the purpose of providing graffiti removal services; (b) abate the nuisance by removing or concealing the graffiti and notify the city of such abatement; (c) inform the city that the owner consents to the marking and intends that it remain on the building. Such request shall indicate the method by which an owner may contact the city for the purpose of conveying any information or making any request in accordance with this section. 2. The failure of the owner to comply with subparagraph (a), (b) or (c) of paragraph one of this subdivision within thirty-five days of the date of such request, or within fifty days of the date of such request if such owner has requested an extension within the initial thirty-five day period, shall result in the issuance of a notice of violation pursuant to subdivision h of this section. 3. For purposes of this subdivision, owner shall mean the person registered with the department of housing preservation and development pursuant to article two of subchapter four of chapter two of title twenty-seven of this code as the owner or agent of the premises or the owner identified in records maintained by the commissioner of finance for communications from the commissioner of finance. h. Notice of violation. 1. Notwithstanding any provision in this section to the contrary, where the city has determined that it is unable to provide graffiti removal services to a particular property, or to a specific location on the property, an agency or agencies designated by the mayor shall serve a notice of violation, in the manner prescribed in paragraph two of subdivision d of section 1049-a of the charter, on the owner of the property. Such notice shall indicate that the owner is in violation of subdivision b of this section and that the failure to remove or conceal the graffiti within sixty days of receipt of the notice or to consent to the marking shall result in the imposition of a penalty as set forth in subdivision i of this section. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph one of this subdivision, a residential building containing fewer than six dwelling units shall not be issued a notice of violation pursuant to this subdivision. 3. Notwithstanding paragraph one of this subdivision, a residential building containing six or more dwelling units or a commercial building shall not be issued a notice of violation pursuant to this subdivision more than once in any sixty-day period. 4. Notwithstanding paragraph one of this subdivision, a commercial or residential building whose owner has granted permission for the city and/or its contractors or agents pursuant to subdivision g of this section to enter such building for the purpose of providing graffiti removal services shall not be issued a notice of violation pursuant to this subdivision. i. Penalty for failure to remove graffiti from commercial and residential buildings. The owner of a commercial or residential building who has been given written notice pursuant to subdivision h of this section and who fails to remove or conceal such graffiti within sixty days of receipt of such notice or to consent to the marking shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than one hundred fifty dollars nor more than three hundred dollars. Such civil penalty may be recovered in a proceeding before the environmental control board. j. Rulemaking. The agency or agencies designated by the mayor to provide graffiti removal services shall have the authority to promulgate rules to implement the provisions of this section. § 10-118 Destruction or removal of property in buildings or structures. (a) No person other than the owner of a building or structure, the duly authorized agent of such owner, or an appropriate legal authority shall destroy or remove any part of such building or structure. (b) No person shall transport through, along or across a public street or way used materials or parts of buildings or structures, including but not limited to, piping, heating equipment, wiring, or other fixtures, windows or parts thereof, doors, radiators, bricks, wood beams or other parts, unless such person shall possess a bill of sale or other proper proof of ownership or right to possession of same signed by the owner of the building or structure, or one authorized by an appropriate legal authority. (c) No dealer in junk or used materials shall purchase used materials or parts of buildings or structures, including but not limited to, piping, heating equipment, wiring, or other fixtures, windows or parts thereof, doors, radiators, bricks, wood beams or other parts, unless such dealer shall obtain at the time of purchase a bill of sale or other proper proof of ownership or right of possession of same signed by the owner of the building or structure from which said materials were taken, or by the duly authorized agent of such owner or by an appropriate legal authority. (d) Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not more than five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not more than three months, or both. § 10-118.1 Theft of manhole covers. a. Except as provided in subdivision d of this section, no person shall remove, or transport through, along or across a public street, any manhole cover, including but not limited to the cover of an opening in the ground, street or sidewalk used by a public utility or authority to access underground vaults, structures, installations, or other enclosed space; or the cover of such an opening that is part of a sewer system, fuel storage system, or water supply system. b. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars nor more than ten thousand dollars. A notice of violation issued pursuant to this section shall be returnable to the environmental control board, which shall have the power to impose such civil penalty. c. In addition to the civil penalties set forth in subdivision b of this section, any person who knowingly violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than ten thousand dollars, or imprisonment not exceeding thirty days, or both for each violation. d. The prohibition in this section shall not apply to the owner of such cover, the duly authorized agent of such owner, or an appropriate legal authority. § 10-119 Posting. a. It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, paint, print, nail or attach or affix by any means whatsoever any handbill, poster, notice, sign, advertisement, sticker or other printed material upon any curb, gutter, flagstone, tree, lamppost, awning post, telegraph pole, telephone pole, public utility pole, public garbage bin, bus shelter, bridge, elevated train structure, highway fence, barrel, box, parking meter, mail box, traffic control device, traffic stanchion, traffic sign (including pole), tree box, tree pit protection device, bench, traffic barrier, hydrant, public pay telephone, city- owned grassy area adjacent to a street, any personal property maintained on a street or other city-owned property pursuant to a franchise, concession or revocable consent granted by the city or other such item or structure in any street, or to direct, suffer or permit any servant, agent, employee or other person under his or her control to engage in such activity; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any handbill, poster, notice, sign, advertisement, sticker or other printed material so posted by or under the direction of the council, or by or under the direction of any city agency, or pursuant to a franchise, concession or revocable consent granted pursuant to chapter fourteen of the charter. b. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the person whose name, telephone number, or other identifying information appears on any handbill, poster, notice, sign, advertisement, sticker or other printed material on any item or structure described in subdivision a of this section in any street violated this section by either (i) pasting, posting, painting, printing, nailing or attaching or affixing by any means whatsoever such handbill, poster, notice, sign, advertisement, sticker or other printed material, or (ii) directing, suffering or permitting a servant, agent, employee or other individual under such person's control to engage in such activity. c. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that if a telephone number that appears on any handbill, poster, notice, sign or advertisement placed in violation of subdivision a of this section belongs to a telephone answering service and no other telephone number or address is readily obtainable to locate the person or business advertised therein, such telephone answering service shall be held liable for a violation of subdivision a in accordance with the provisions of section 10-121. d. The commissioner of the department of sanitation shall be authorized to issue subpoenas to obtain official telephone records for the purpose of determining the identity and location of any person or entity reasonably believed by the commissioner to have violated subdivision a of this section. § 10-120 Protection of city advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down, deface or destroy any notice, handbill, sign, advertisement, poster, sticker or other printed material, put up or posted by, or under the direction of the council, or by or under the direction of any city agency or pursuant to a franchise, concession or revocable consent granted pursuant to chapter fourteen of the charter. § 10-121 Violation. a. Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of section 10-119 or 10-120 of the code shall be punished by a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars nor more than one hundred fifty dollars, for the first offense and not less than one hundred fifty dollars nor more than two hundred fifty dollars for the second and each subsequent offense within a twelve month period, plus the cost of the removal of the unauthorized signs, imprisonment for not more than ten days, or both; provided, however, that subdivision b of section 10-119 of the code shall not apply with respect to criminal prosecutions brought pursuant to this subdivision. b. In the instance where the notice of violation, appearance ticket or summons is issued for breach of the provisions of section 10-119 of the code and sets forth thereon civil penalties only, such process shall be returnable to the environmental control board, which shall have the power to impose the civil penalties of seventy five dollars for the first offense and one hundred fifty dollars for the second and each subsequent offense within a twelve month period. Anyone found to have violated the provisions of section 10-119, in addition to any penalty imposed, shall be responsible for the cost of the removal of the unauthorized signs. Anyone found to have violated section 10-119 of this chapter by affixing any handbill, poster, notice, sign or advertisement to a tree by means of nailing or piercing the tree by any method shall have an additional penalty imposed equal to the amount of the original penalty. c. In the instance where the notice of violation, appearance ticket or summons is issued for breach of the provisions of section 10-120 of the code and sets forth thereon civil penalties only, such process shall be returnable to the environmental control board, which shall have the power to impose a civil penalty of not less than seventy five dollars nor more than one hundred fifty dollars for the first offense and not less than one hundred fifty dollars nor more than two hundred fifty dollars for the second and each subsequent offense within a twelve month period. Anyone found to have violated the provisions of section 10-120, in addition to any penalty imposed, shall be responsible for the cost of the removal of the signs that were torn down, defaced or destroyed. d. In the event that a violator fails to answer such notice of violation, appearance ticket or summons within the time provided therefor by the rules and regulations of the environmental control board, he or she shall become liable for additional penalties. The additional penalties shall not exceed fifty dollars for each violation. e. Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of section 10-119 or 10-120 of the code shall be liable for a civil penalty as provided for in subdivisions b and c of this section. f. Liability and responsibility for any civil penalty imposed pursuant to this section for any violation of section 10-119 or 10-120 of the code shall be joint and severable on the part of any corporation found to be liable and responsible and its officers, principals, and stockholders owning more than ten percent of its outstanding voting stock. g. For the purposes of imposing a criminal fine or civil penalty pursuant to this section, every handbill, poster, notice, sign or advertisement pasted, posted, painted, printed or nailed in violation of section 10-119 of the code or torn down, defaced or destroyed in violation of section 10-120 of the code, shall be deemed to be the subject of a separate violation for which a separate criminal fine or civil penalty shall be imposed. § 10-121.1 Rewards for providing information leading to criminal conviction of a person for unlawful posting. The mayor, upon the recommendation of the sanitation commissioner, the transportation commissioner, the parks and recreation commissioner, the citywide administrative services commissioner or the police commissioner, shall be authorized to offer and pay a reward in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars to any person who provides information leading to the criminal conviction of any person who may have violated the provisions of section 10-119 or section 10-120 of the code. No police officer, peace officer or any other law enforcement officer, and no officer, official or employee of the city of New York shall be entitled, directly or indirectly, to collect or receive any such reward. § 10-122 Motor boats; operation adjacent to bathing beaches. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor boat within three hundred feet of any public beach used by bathers. Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding three months or by both such fine and imprisonment. § 10-123 Bathing in public. It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or bathe in any of the waters within the jurisdiction of the city, except in public or private bathing houses, unless covered with a bathing suit so as to prevent any indecent exposure of the person; and it shall be unlawful for any person to dress or undress in any place exposed to view. Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than ten dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding ten days or by both such fine and imprisonment. § 10-124 Wearing of bathing suits on streets prohibited. § 10-125 Consumption of alcohol on streets prohibited. a. Definitions. Whenever used in this section, the following terms are defined as follows: 1. Alcoholic beverage. Any liquid intended for human consumption containing more than one-half of one percent (.005) of alcohol by volume. 2. Public place. A place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access including, but not limited to, any highway, street, road, sidewalk, parking area, shopping area, place of amusement, playground, park or beach located within the city except that the definition of a public place shall not include those premises duly licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises or within their own private property. Such public place shall also include the interior of any stationary motor vehicle which is on any highway, street, road, parking area, shopping area, playground, park or beach located within the city. b. No person shall drink or consume an alcoholic beverage, or possess, with intent to drink or consume, an open container containing an alcoholic beverage in any public place except at a block party, feast or similar function for which a permit has been obtained. c. Possession of an open container containing an alcoholic beverage by any person shall create a rebuttable presumption that such person did intend to consume the contents thereof in violation of this section. d. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the consumption of an alcoholic beverage in any duly licensed establishment whose certificate of occupancy extends upon a street. e. The violation of subdivision b of this section shall constitute an offense punishable by a fine of not more than 25 dollars or imprisonment of up to one day, or pursuant to the provisions of the family court act of the state of New York where applicable. f. Any person who violates subdivision b of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of up to 25 dollars, which may be recoverable in a proceeding before the office of administrative trials and hearings, pursuant to chapter 45-A of the charter. § 10-126 Aviation in and over the city. a. Definitions. When used in this section the following words or terms shall mean or include: 1. Aircraft. Any contrivance, now or hereafter invented for avigation or flight in the air, including a captive balloon, except a parachute or other contrivance designed for use, and carried primarily as safety equipment. 2. Place of landing. Any authorized airport, aircraft landing site, sky port or seaplane base in the port of New York or in the limits of the city. 3. Limits of the city. The water, waterways and land under the jurisdiction of the city and the air space above same. 4. Avigate. To pilot, steer, direct, fly or manage an aircraft in or through the air, whether controlled from the ground or otherwise. 5. Congested area. Any land terrain within the limits of the city. 6. Person. A natural person, co-partnership, firm, company, association, joint stock association, corporation or other like organization. b. Parachuting. It shall be unlawful for any person to jump or leap from an aircraft in a parachute or any other device within the limits of the city except in the event of imminent danger or while under official orders of any branch of the military service. c. Take offs and landings. It shall be unlawful for any person avigating an aircraft to take off or land, except in an emergency, at any place within the limits of the city other than places of landing designated by the department of transportation or the port of New York authority. d. Advertising. 1. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, suffer or permit to be used advertising in the form of towing banners from or upon an aircraft over the limits of the city, or to drop advertising matter in the form of pamphlets, circulars, or other objects from an aircraft over the limits of the city, or to use a loud speaker or other sound device for advertising from an aircraft over the limits of the city. Any person who employs another to avigate an aircraft for advertising in violation of this subdivision shall be guilty of a violation hereof. 2. Any person who employs, procures or induces another to operate, avigate, lend, lease or donate any aircraft as defined in this section for the purpose of advertising in violation of this subdivision shall be guilty of a violation hereof. 3. The use of the name of any person or of any proprietor, vendor or exhibitor in connection with such advertising shall be presumptive evidence that such advertising was conducted with his or her knowledge and consent. e. Dangerous or reckless operation or avigation. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or avigate an aircraft either on the ground, on the water or in the air within the limits of the city while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics or other habit-forming drugs, or to operate or avigate an aircraft in a careless or reckless manner so as to endanger life or property of another. In any proceeding or action charging careless or reckless operation or avigation of aircraft in violation of this section, the court, in determining whether the operation or avigation was careless or reckless, shall consider the standards for safe operation or avigation of aircraft prescribed by federal statutes or regulations governing aeronautics. f. Air traffic rules. It shall be unlawful for any person to navigate an aircraft within the limits of the city in any manner prohibited by any provision of, or contrary to the rules and regulations of, the federal aviation administration. g. Reports. It shall be unlawful for the operator or owner of an aircraft to fail to report to the police department within ten hours a forced landing of aircraft within the limits of the city or an accident to an aircraft where personal injury, property damage or serious damage to the aircraft is involved. h. Rules and regulations. The police commissioner is authorized to make such rules and regulations as the commissioner may deem necessary to enforce the provisions of this section. i. Violations. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. § 10-127 Commercial vehicles to display name and address of owner. a. Definition. When used herein: 1. The word commercial vehicle, shall mean any vehicle, either horse drawn or motor driven, used, constructed or equipped for the transportation of goods, wares or merchandise in trade or commerce. b. Vehicles, markings of. Every commercial vehicle operating on the streets of the city shall at all times display permanently, plainly marked on both sides in letters and any numerals in accordance with section 390.21 of title 49 of the code of federal regulations, the name of the owner thereof. The commissioner of transportation may promulgate rules imposing requirements or prohibitions relating to such markings, or both, applicable to such commercial vehicles, provided that any such requirements or prohibitions imposed by such commissioner shall not be more restrictive than any requirements or prohibitions applicable to such vehicles set forth in section 390.21 of title 49 of the code of federal regulations. c. Violations. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by not more than thirty days' imprisonment, or by a fine of not more than fifty dollars, or both. § 10-128 Declaration of intent; dress of female employees in places of public accommodation. It is hereby declared, as a matter of public policy, that the attire and appearance of females employed in cabarets, dance halls, catering establishments, coffee houses, hotels, restaurants or other places of public accommodations as hostesses, waitresses, cashiers, barmaids or in any capacity in which any such female comes in contact with or is likely to come in contact with the patrons of such establishments, attired in such a manner so that the breasts of such female employees are completely uncovered or covered only by a device attached to the nipples of each breast, is offensive to common decency, abhorrent to the standards of continence of the community and inimical to the general welfare of the people of the city of New York and in order that the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city may be protected and insured such conduct is prohibited as hereinafter provided. § 10-129 Prohibited acts. a. It shall be unlawful for any female while employed in, or who in any other way is engaged by any cabaret, dance hall, catering establishment, coffee house, hotel, restaurant or other place of public assembly or public accommodation, as a hostess, waitress, cashier, barmaid or in any other capacity wherein she comes in contact with or is likely to come in contact with the patrons thereof, to be clothed or costumed in such a manner so as to appear before the patrons of such place with less than an opaque covering of any portion of the breast below the top of the areola. b. No person or persons having control of or being in charge of any cabaret, dance hall, catering establishment, coffee house, hotel, restaurant or other place of public assembly or public accommodation shall permit, aid or abet any female to appear in any such place in violation of the provisions of the preceding subdivision and the appearance of any female in any such place in violation of the provisions of the preceding subdivision shall be presumptive evidence that such appearance was with the permission of the person or persons having charge of or control of such places. § 10-130 Punishment. Any person or persons who violate any of the provisions of section 10-129 shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than thirty days or by a fine of not less than fifty dollars nor more than one hundred dollars or by both such fine and imprisonment and if any person shall have been previously convicted of a violation of section 10-129, he or she shall upon any subsequent conviction be punished by imprisonment of not less than ten days nor more than sixty days or by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than five hundred dollars or by both such fine and imprisonment. § 10-131 Firearms. a. Pistols or revolvers, keeping or carrying. 1. The police commissioner shall grant and issue licenses hereunder pursuant to the provisions of article four hundred of the penal law. Unless they indicate otherwise, such licenses and permits shall expire on the first day of the second January after the date of issuance. 2. Every license to carry or possess a pistol or revolver in the city may be issued for a term of no less than one or more than three years. Every applicant for a license to carry or possess a pistol or revolver in the city shall pay therefor, a fee of three hundred forty dollars for each original or renewal application for a three year license period or part thereof, a fee of ten dollars for each replacement application of a lost license. 3. Every applicant to whom a license has been issued by any person other than the police commissioner, except as provided in paragraph five of this subdivision, for a special permit from the commissioner granting it validity within the city of New York, shall pay for such permit a fee of three hundred forty dollars, for each renewal a fee of three hundred forty dollars, for each replacement of a lost permit a fee of ten dollars. 4. Fees paid as provided herein shall not be refunded in the event that an original or renewal application, or a special validation permit application, is denied by the police commissioner. 5. A fee shall not be charged or collected for a license to have and carry concealed a pistol or revolver which shall be issued upon the application of the commissioner of correction or the warden or superintendent of any prison, penitentiary, workhouse or other institution for the detention of persons convicted or accused of crime or offense, or held as witnesses in criminal cases in the city. 6. The fees prescribed by this subdivision shall be collected by the police commissioner, and shall be paid into the general fund of the city established pursuant to section one hundred nine of the charter, and a return in detail shall be made to the comptroller by such commissioner of the fees so collected and paid over by the commissioner. 7. A fee shall not be charged or collected for the issuance of a license, or the renewal thereof, to have and carry concealed a pistol or revolver which is issued upon the application of a qualified retired police officer as defined in subdivision thirty-four of section 1.20 of the criminal procedure law, or a qualified retired bridge and tunnel officer, sergeant or lieutenant of the triborough bridge and tunnel authority as defined under subdivision twenty of section 2.10 of the criminal procedure law, or a qualified retired uniformed court officer in the unified court system, or a qualified retired court clerk in the unified court system in the first and second judicial departments, as defined in paragraphs a and b of subdivision twenty-one of section 2.10 of the criminal procedure law or a retired correction officer as defined in subdivision twenty-five of section 2.10 of the criminal procedure law or a qualified retired sheriff, undersheriff or deputy sheriff of the city of New York as defined under subdivision two of section 2.10 of the criminal procedure law. b. Air pistols and air rifles; selling or possessing. 1. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell or have in such person's possession any air pistol or air rifle or similar instrument in which the propelling force is a spring or air, except that the sale of such instruments if accompanied by delivery to a point without the city, and possession for such purpose, shall not be unlawful if such person shall have secured an annual license from the police commissioner of the city authorizing such sale and possession. The sale and delivery of such instruments within the city from one licensee to another licensee, and the use of such instruments in connection with an amusement licensed by the department of consumer and worker protection or at rifle or pistol ranges duly authorized by law shall not be considered a violation of this subdivision. 2. All persons dealing in such instruments referred to in this subdivision, shall keep a record showing the name and address of each person purchasing such instrument or instruments, together with place of delivery and said record shall be open to inspection during regular business hours by the officers of the police department of the city. 3. Every person to whom a license shall be granted to sell, possess and deliver the instruments described in this subdivision shall pay therefor an annual fee of ten dollars. c. Discharge of small-arms. It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, rifle, fowling-piece or other firearms in the city; provided that the provisions hereof shall not apply to premises designated by the police commissioner, a list of which shall be filed with the city clerk and published in the City Record. d. Sale of toy-pistols. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispose of to a minor any toy-pistol or pistol that can be loaded with powder and ball or blank cartridge to be exploded by means of metal caps; but nothing herein contained shall apply to the sale or disposal of what are known as firecracker pistols, torpedo pistols or such pistols as are used for the explosion of paper caps. e. Tear gas; sale or possession of; fees for permits. 1. It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell or offer for sale, possess or use, or attempt to use, any lachrymating, asphyxiating, incapacitating or deleterious gas or gases, or liquid or liquids, or chemical or chemicals, without a permit issued by the police commissioner under such regulations as the commissioner or the council may prescribe; nor shall any person manufacture, sell or offer for sale, possess or use any weapon, candle, device, or any instrument of any kind designed to discharge, emit, release or use any lachrymating, asphyxiating, incapacitating or other deleterious gas or gases, or liquid or liquids, or chemical or chemicals, without a similar permit, similarly issued, except that the members of the police department in the line of duty may possess or use any such gas, liquid or chemical. 2. Applicants for permits under the provisions of this subdivision shall pay annual fees as follows: (a) To carry or possess such gas or liquid $10.00 Renewals $5.00 (b) To install such gas or liquid on any premises $25.00 Renewals $5.00 (c) To manufacture such gas or liquid $100.00 (d) To sell such gas or liquid at wholesale $100.00 (e) To sell such gas or liquid at retail $50.00 (f) To sell instruments or devices designed to discharge or emit such gas or $50.00 liquid (g) To possess or carry any instrument or device to discharge or emit such ga$5.00 or liquid f. Violations. Except as is otherwise specifically provided in this section, any person who shall wilfully violate any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. g. 1. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sell, possess or use or attempt to use or give away, any toy or imitation firearm which substantially duplicates or can reasonably be perceived to be an actual firearm unless: (a) the entire exterior surface of such toy or imitation firearm is colored white, bright red, bright orange, bright yellow, bright green, bright blue, bright pink or bright purple, either singly or as the predominant color in combination with other colors in any pattern; or (b) such toy or imitation firearm is constructed entirely of transparent or translucent materials which permits unmistakable observation of the imitation or toy firearm's complete contents; and (c) the barrel of such toy or imitation firearm, other than the barrel of any such toy or imitation firearm that is a water gun, is closed with the same material of which the toy or imitation firearm is made for a distance of not less than one-half inch from the front end of said barrel, and; (d) such toy or imitation firearm has legibly stamped thereon, the name of the manufacturer or some trade name, mark or brand by which the manufacturer can be readily identified; and (e) such toy or imitation or firearm does not have attached thereto a laser pointer, as defined in paragraph one of subdivision a of section 10-134.2 of this code. 2. Paragraph one of this subdivision shall not apply to: (a) the possession or display of toy or imitation firearms by a manufacturer or dealer solely for purposes of sales that are accompanied by delivery to a point without the city; (b) any toy or imitation firearm that will be used only for or in the production of television programs or theatrical or motion picture presentations, provided, however, that such use of any toy or imitation firearm complies with all applicable laws, rules or regulations concerning request and receipt of waivers authorizing such use; (c) non-firing collector replica antique firearms, which look authentic and may be a scale model but are not intended as toys modeled on real firearms designed, manufactured and produced prior to 1898; (d) decorative, ornamental, and miniature objects having the appearance, shape and/or configuration of a firearm, including those intended to be displayed on a desk or worn on items such as bracelets, necklaces and key chains, provided that the objects measure no more than thirty-eight (38) millimeters in height by seventy (70) millimeters in length, the length measurement excluding any gun stock length measurement. 3. (a) Authorized agents and employees of the department of consumer and worker protection, and of any other agency designated by the mayor, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this subdivision. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty pursuant to this subdivision shall be commenced by service of a notice of hearing that shall be returnable to a tribunal of the office of administrative trials and hearings. Such tribunal shall have the power to impose civil penalties for a violation of this subdivision of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5000) for the first offense and not less than three thousand dollars ($3000) nor more than eight thousand dollars ($8000) for each succeeding offense occurring within two years of the first offense, without regard to whether the first offense involved a toy or imitation firearm of the same model involved in any succeeding offense. For the purposes of this subdivision, selling, offering for sale, possessing, using or attempting to use or give away any single toy or imitation firearm in violation of this subdivision shall be considered a single violation. (b) If any person is found to have violated the provisions of paragraph one of this subdivision on three or more separate occasions within two years, then, in addition to imposing the penalties set forth in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph, the department shall be authorized to order that any or all premises operated by such person where the violations occurred be sealed for a period not to exceed five consecutive days, except that such premises may be entered with the permission of the department solely for actions necessary to remedy past violations of this subdivision or prevent future violations. Notice of any third violation for engaging in a violation of paragraph one of this subdivision shall state that premises may be ordered sealed after a finding of a third violation and specify which premises may be subject to sealing. For the purpose of this subparagraph, any violations at a place of business operated by a different person shall not be included in determining the number of violations of any subsequent operator of a business at that location unless the commissioner establishes that the subsequent operator of such business did not acquire the premises or business through an arm's length transaction as defined in subparagraph (c) of this paragraph or that the sale or lease was conducted, in whole or in part, for the purpose of permitting the previous operator of the business who had been found guilty of violating paragraph one at such premises to avoid the effect of violations on the premises. The procedures provided for in subdivisions c, e, f, i, and j of section 20-105 of title twenty of this code shall apply to an order of the commissioner for sealing of such premises. (c) For purposes of subparagraph (b) of this paragraph, arm's length transaction means a sale of a fee or all undivided interests in real property, or a lease of any part thereof, or a sale of a business, in good faith and for valuable consideration, that reflects the fair market value of such real property or lease, or business, in the open market, between two informed and willing parties, where neither is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction, unaffected by any unusual conditions indicating a reasonable possibility that the sale or lease was made for the purpose of permitting the original operator to avoid the effect of violations on the premises. The following sales or leases shall be presumed not to be arm's length transactions unless adequate documentation is provided demonstrating that the sale or lease was not conducted, in whole or in part, for the purpose of permitting the original operator to avoid the effect of violations on the premises: (i) a sale between relatives, which term shall mean, for purposes of this paragraph, a person and his or her spouse, domestic partner, parent, grandparent, child, stepchild, or stepparent, or any person who is the direct descendant of the grandparents of the person or of the spouse or domestic partner of the person; (ii) a sale between related companies or partners in a business; or (iii) a sale or lease affected by other facts or circumstances that would indicate that the sale or lease is entered into for the primary purpose of permitting the original operator to avoid the effect of violations on the premises. (d) For purposes of this paragraph: (i) the term department shall refer to the department of consumer and worker protection; (ii) the term commissioner shall refer to the commissioner of consumer and worker protection; (iii) the term premises shall refer to land and improvements or appurtenances or any part thereof; and (iv) companies shall be deemed related if an officer, principal, director, or stockholder owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation of one company is or has been an officer, principal, director, or stockholder owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the other, but companies shall not be deemed related solely because they share employees other than officers, principals, or directors. (e) A closing directed by the department pursuant to this paragraph shall not constitute an act of possession, ownership or control by the city of the closed premises. (f) Mutilation or removal of a posted order of the commissioner or his designee shall be a violation punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding fifteen days, or both, provided such order contains therein a notice of such penalty. Any other intentional disobedience or resistance to any provision of the orders issued pursuant to this paragraph, including using or occupying or permitting any other person to use or occupy any premises ordered closed without the permission of the department as described in subparagraph (b) shall, in addition to any other punishment prescribed by law, be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both. 4. Any person who shall violate this subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year or both. h. Rifles and shotguns; carrying or possessing. 1. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess a loaded rifle or shotgun in public within the city limits. Any person who shall violate this paragraph shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 2. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess an unloaded rifle or shotgun in public within the city limits unless such rifle or shotgun is completely enclosed, or contained, in a non-transparent carrying case. Any person who shall violate this paragraph shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 3. The above provisions shall not apply to persons in the military service of the state of New York when duly authorized by regulations issued by the chief of staff to the governor to possess same, police officers and peace officers as defined in the criminal procedure law, or to participants in special events when authorized by the police commissioner. i. 1. It shall be unlawful for any person, except as otherwise authorized pursuant to law, to dispose of any ammunition or any ammunition feeding device, as defined in section 10-301, designed for use in a firearm, rifle or shotgun, unless he or she is a dealer in firearms or a dealer in rifles and shotguns and such disposition is in accordance with law, provided that a person in lawful possession of such ammunition or ammunition feeding device may dispose of such ammunition or ammunition feeding device to a dealer in firearms who is authorized, or a dealer in rifles and shotguns who is authorized, to possess such ammunition or ammunition feeding device. 2. It shall be unlawful for any dealer in firearms or dealer in rifles and shotguns to dispose of any pistol or revolver ammunition of a particular caliber to any person not authorized to possess a pistol or revolver of such caliber within the city of New York. 3. It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized to possess a pistol or revolver within the city of New York to possess pistol or revolver ammunition, provided that a dealer in rifles and shotguns may possess such ammunition. 4. It shall be unlawful for any person authorized to possess a pistol or revolver of a particular caliber within the city of New York to possess pistol or revolver ammunition of a different caliber. 5. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs two, three and four of this subdivision, any person authorized to possess a rifle within the city of New York may possess ammunition suitable for use in such rifle and a dealer in firearms or dealer in rifles and shotguns may dispose of such ammunition to such person pursuant to section 10-306. 6. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any ammunition feeding device designed for use in a firearm except as provided in subparagraphs (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of this paragraph. (a) Any pistol or revolver licensee or permittee may possess an ammunition feeding device designed for use in the pistol or revolver such licensee or permittee is authorized to possess, provided that such ammunition feeding device is not capable of holding more than seventeen rounds of ammunition and provided further that such ammunition feeding device does not extend below the grip of the pistol or revolver. (b) Any person who is exempt pursuant to section 265.20 of the penal law from provisions of the penal law relating to possession of a firearm and who is authorized pursuant to any provision of law to possess a firearm without a license or permit therefor, may possess an ammunition feeding device suitable for use in such firearm, subject to the same conditions as apply with respect to such person's possession of such firearm. (c) Any dealer in firearms may possess such ammunition feeding devices for the purpose of disposition authorized pursuant to paragraph seven of this subdivision. (d) Any person who leases a firearm that has been certified by the commissioner as deactivated, from a dealer in firearms or a special theatrical dealer, for use during the course of any television, movie, stage or other similar theatrical production, or any professional photographer who leases a firearm that has been certified by the commissioner as deactivated, from a dealer in firearms or a special theatrical dealer, for use in the pursuance of his or her profession, may possess an ammunition feeding device suitable for use in such firearm, subject to the same conditions as apply with respect to such person's possession of such firearm. (e) Any special theatrical dealer may possess such ammunition feeding devices exclusively for the purpose of leasing such ammunition feeding devices to such persons as are described in subparagraph (d) of this paragraph. 7. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of to another person any ammunition feeding device designed for use in a firearm, provided that a dealer in firearms may dispose of, to such persons as are described in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of paragraph six of this subdivision, such ammunition feeding devices as may be possessed by such persons and provided further that a person in lawful possession of such ammunition feeding devices may dispose of such ammunition feeding devices to a dealer in firearms. In addition, a dealer in firearms or a special theatrical dealer may lease, to such persons as are described in subparagraph (d) of paragraph six of this subdivision, such ammunition feeding devices as may be possessed by such persons. 8. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs six and seven of this subdivision any person may, within ninety days of the effective date of this local law, dispose of an ammunition feeding device designed for use in a firearm to a dealer in firearms. 9. The regular and ordinary transport of ammunition or ammunition feeding devices as merchandise shall not be limited by this subdivision, provided that the person transporting such ammunition or ammunition feeding devices, where he or she knows or has reasonable means of ascertaining what he or she is transporting, notifies, in writing, the police commissioner of the name and address of the consignee and the place of delivery, and withholds delivery to the consignee for such reasonable period of time designated in writing by the police commissioner as the police commissioner may deem necessary for investigation as to whether the consignee may lawfully receive and possess such ammunition or ammunition feeding devices. 10. The regular and ordinary transport of ammunition or ammunition feeding devices by a manufacturer of ammunition or ammunition feeding devices, or by an agent or employee of such manufacturer who is duly authorized in writing by such manufacturer to transport ammunition or ammunition feeding devices on the date or dates specified, directly between places where the manufacturer regularly conducts business, provided such ammunition or ammunition feeding devices are transported in a locked opaque container, shall not be limited by this subdivision, provided that transportation of such ammunition or ammunition feeding devices into, out of or within the city of New York may be done only with the consent of the police commissioner of the city of New York. To obtain such consent, the manufacturer must notify the police commissioner in writing of the name and address of the transporting manufacturer, or agent or employee of the manufacturer who is authorized in writing by such manufacturer to transport ammunition or ammunition feeding devices, the quantity, caliber and type of ammunition or ammunition feeding devices to be transported and the place where the manufacturer regularly conducts business within the city of New York and such other information as the commissioner may deem necessary. The manufacturer shall not transport such ammunition or ammunition feeding devices between the designated places of business for such reasonable period of time designated in writing by the police commissioner as such official may deem necessary for investigation and to give consent. The police commissioner may not unreasonably withhold his or her consent. For the purposes of this paragraph, places where the manufacturer regularly conducts business include, but are not limited to, places where the manufacturer regularly or customarily conducts development or design of ammunition or ammunition feeding devices, or regularly or customarily conducts tests on ammunition or ammunition feeding devices. 11. A person shall be deemed authorized to possess a pistol or revolver within the city of New York if such person is authorized to possess a pistol or revolver within the city of New York pursuant to this section, section 10-302 or section 400.00 of the penal law, or is exempt pursuant to section 265.20 of the penal law from provisions of the penal law relating to possession of a firearm and is authorized pursuant to any provision of law to possess a pistol or revolver within the city of New York without a license or permit therefor. A person shall be deemed authorized to possess a rifle within the city of New York if such person is authorized to possess a rifle within the city of New York pursuant to section 10-303, or is a person permitted pursuant to section 10-305 to possess a rifle without a permit therefor. 12. No pistol or revolver ammunition or ammunition feeding device shall be disposed of to any person pursuant to this subdivision unless such person exhibits the license or permit authorizing him or her to possess a pistol or revolver within the city of New York or exhibits proof that he or she is exempt pursuant to section 265.20 of the penal law from provisions of the penal law relating to possession of a firearm and proof that he or she is authorized pursuant to any provision of law to possess a pistol or revolver within the city of New York without a license or permit therefor. 13. A record shall be kept by the dealer of each disposition of ammunition or ammunition feeding devices under this subdivision which shall show the quantity, caliber and type of ammunition or ammunition feeding devices disposed of, the name and address of the person receiving same, the date and time of the transaction, and the number of the license or permit exhibited or description of the proof of status as a person not required to have a license or permit as required by paragraph twelve of this subdivision. 14. Any person who shall violate this subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 15. Any person who shall violate this subdivision shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars, to be recovered in a civil action brought by the corporation counsel in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. 16. The provisions of paragraphs three, four and six of this subdivision shall not apply to a person voluntarily surrendering ammunition or ammunition feeding devices, provided that such surrender shall be made to the police commissioner or the commissioner's designee; and provided, further, that the same shall be surrendered by such person only after he or she gives notice in writing to the police commissioner or the commissioner's designee, stating his or her name, address, the nature of the property to be surrendered, and the approximate time of day and the place where such surrender shall take place. Such notice shall be acknowledged immediately upon receipt thereof by such authority. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as granting immunity from prosecution for any crime or offense except that of unlawful possession of such ammunition or ammunition feeding devices surrendered as herein provided. A person who possesses any such ammunition or ammunition feeding devices as an executor or administrator or any other lawful possessor of such property of a decedent may continue to possess such property for a period not over fifteen days. If such property is not lawfully disposed of within such period, the possessor shall deliver it to the police commissioner or the commissioner's designee or such property may be delivered to the superintendent of state police. When such property is delivered to the police commissioner or the commissioner's designee, such officer shall hold it and shall thereafter deliver it on the written request of such executor, administrator or other lawful possessor of such property to a named person, provided such named person is licensed to or is otherwise lawfully permitted to possess the same. If no request to deliver the property is received within two years of the delivery of such property to such official, he or she shall dispose of it in accordance with the provisions of section 400.05 of the penal law. j. Deceptively colored firearms, rifles, shotguns, and assault weapons. (1) Definitions. 1. (i) When used in this subdivision, the term deceptively colored firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon shall include any firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon any substantial portion of whose exterior surface is colored any color other than black, dark grey, dark green, silver, steel, or nickel, except as provided in subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph. For purposes of this subparagraph, the exterior surface of either the receiver or the slide of a firearm shall be deemed to constitute a substantial portion of the exterior surface of the firearm. (ii) Any firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon any substantial portion of whose exterior surface is colored white, bright red, bright orange, bright yellow, bright green, bright blue, bright pink or bright purple, either singly or as the predominant color in combination with other colors in any pattern shall be deemed to be a deceptively colored firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon, except as provided in subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph. (iii) Notwithstanding subparagraph (i) and (ii) of this paragraph, a firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon shall not be deemed to be a deceptively colored firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon merely because its handle is composed of ivory, colored so as to appear to be composed of ivory, composed of wood, or colored so as to be composed of wood. (iv) The term deceptive coloring product shall mean and include any equipment, product, or material that is designed for use in modifying any firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon so as to make it a deceptively colored firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon. Any equipment, product, or material that is held out, offered for sale, or otherwise disposed of based on its utility, alone or in combination with other equipment, products, or materials, in modifying any firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon so as to make it a deceptively colored firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon shall be deemed a deceptive coloring product. Any combination of equipment, products, or materials that are jointly held out, offered for sale, or otherwise disposed of based on their utility, jointly or in combination with other equipment, products, or materials, in modifying any firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon so as to make it a deceptively colored firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon shall be deemed a deceptive coloring product. (v) The definitions set forth in section 10-301 of this title shall apply to this subdivision. 2. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of a deceptively colored firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon or a deceptive coloring product except as authorized by paragraph six of this subdivision. It shall be unlawful for any person to modify, attempt to modify, or offer to modify any firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon so as to make it a deceptively colored firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon except as authorized by paragraph six of this subdivision. 3. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a deceptively colored firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon or a deceptive coloring product except as authorized by paragraph five or six of this subdivision or for any person to attempt to possess a deceptively colored firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon or a deceptive coloring product except as authorized by paragraph six of this subdivision. 4. Violation of this subdivision or of regulations issued pursuant to it shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment of not more than one year or both. 5. This subdivision shall not apply to the possession of any deceptively colored firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon by any person who possesses it on the effective date of the local law enacting this subdivision, or by any person who acquires it by operation of law after the effective date of the local law enacting this subdivision, or because of the death of another person for whom such person is an executor or administrator of an estate or a trustee of a trust created in a will, provided that, within fifteen days, such person either (i) surrenders such deceptively colored firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon to the commissioner for disposal in accordance with the provisions of section 400.05 of the penal law; or (ii) modifies such firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon so that it is no longer a deceptively colored firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon and cannot be readily converted into one. This subdivision shall not apply to the possession of any deceptive coloring product by any person who possesses it on the effective date of the local law enacting this subdivision, or by any person who acquires it by operation of law after the effective date of the local law enacting this subdivision, or because of the death of another person for whom such person is an executor or administrator of an estate or a trustee of a trust created in a will, provided that within fifteen days such person surrenders such deceptive coloring product to the commissioner for disposal. 6. This subdivision shall not apply to the disposal, possession, modification, or use of any firearm, rifle, shotgun, assault weapon, or deceptive coloring product that is purchased for the use of, sold or shipped to, or issued for the use of, the United States or any department or agency thereof, or any state or any department, agency, or political subdivision thereof. 8. The police commissioner may make and promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this subdivision. Such rules and regulations may provide that for purposes of paragraph six of this subdivision, a firearm, rifle, shotgun, assault weapon, equipment, product, or material that is purchased by, received by, possessed by, or used by a peace officer or police officer shall be deemed to have been issued for the use of the agency employing such officer. § 10-132 Sale of broad head, bladed or hunting arrows. a. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispose of to a person under sixteen a broad head, bladed or hunting arrow or arrowhead. b. Any person who shall violate this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. § 10-133 Possession of knives or instruments. a. Legislative findings. It is hereby declared and found that the possession in public places, streets and parks of the city, of large knives is a menace to the public health, peace, safety and welfare of the people of the city; that the possession in public places, streets and parks of such knives has resulted in the commission of many homicides, robberies, maimings and assaults of and upon the people of the city; that this condition encourages and fosters the commission of crimes, and contributes to juvenile delinquency, youth crime and gangsterism; that unless the possession or carrying in public places, streets and parks of the city of such knives without a lawful purpose is prohibited, there is danger of an increase in crimes of violence and other conditions detrimental to public peace, safety and welfare. It is further declared and found that the wearing or carrying of knives in open view in public places while such knives are not being used for a lawful purpose is unnecessary and threatening to the public and should be prohibited. b. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on his or her person or have in such person's possession, in any public place, street, or park any knife which has a blade length of four inches or more. c. It shall be unlawful for any person in a public place, street or park, to wear outside of his or her clothing or carry in open view any knife with an exposed or unexposed blade unless such person is actually using such knife for a lawful purpose as set forth in subdivision d of this section. d. The provisions of subdivisions b and c of this section shall not apply to (1) persons in the military service of the state of New York when duly authorized to carry or display knives pursuant to regulations issued by the chief of staff to the governor; (2) police officers and peace officers as defined in the criminal procedure law; (3) participants in special events when authorized by the police commissioner; (4) persons in the military or other service of the United States, in pursuit of official duty authorized by federal law; (5) emergency medical technicians or voluntary or paid ambulance drivers while engaged in the performance of their duties; or (6) any person displaying or in possession of a knife otherwise in violation of this section when such knife (a) is being used for or transported immediately to or from a place where it is used for hunting, fishing, camping, hiking, picnicking or any employment, trade or occupation customarily requiring the use of such knife; or (b) is displayed or carried by a member of a theatrical group, drill team, military or para-military unit or veterans organization, to, from, or during a meeting, parade or other performance or practice for such event, which customarily requires the carrying of such knife; or (c) is being transported directly to or from a place of purchase, sharpening or repair, packaged in such a manner as not to allow easy access to such knife while it is transported; or (d) is displayed or carried by a duly enrolled member of the Boy or Girl Scouts of America or a similar organization or society and such display or possession is necessary to participate in the activities of such organization or society. e. Violation of this section shall be an offense punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding fifteen days or by both such fine and imprisonment. § 10-134 Prohibition on sale of certain knives. a. Legislative findings. It is hereby declared and found that the possession in public places, streets and parks of the city, of folding knives which lock upon opening, is a menace to the public health, peace, safety and welfare of the people of the city; that the possession in public places, streets and parks of such knives has resulted in the commission of many homicides, robberies, maimings and assaults of and upon the people of the city, that this condition encourages and fosters the commission of crimes, and contributes to juvenile delinquency, youth crime and gangsterism; that if this situation is not addressed, then there is a danger of an increase in crimes of violence, and other conditions detrimental to public peace, safety and welfare. It has been found that folding knives with a blade of four (4) inches or more that locks in an open position are designed and used almost exclusively for the purpose of stabbing or the threat thereof. Therefore for the safety of the city, such weapons should be prohibited from sale within the jurisdiction of the city of New York. b. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale within the jurisdiction of the city of New York, any folding knife with a blade length of four or more inches which is so constructed that when it is opened it is locked in an open position and cannot be closed without depressing or moving a release mechanism. c. Exempt from this section are importers and exporters or merchants who ship or receive locking folding knives, with a blade length of four or more inches, in bulk, which knives are scheduled to travel or have travelled in the course of international, interstate, or intrastate commerce to a point outside the city. Such bulk shipments shall remain in their original shipping package, unopened, except for inspection and possible subdivision for further movement in interstate or intrastate commerce to a point outside the city. d. Violation of this section shall be an offense punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750) or by imprisonment not exceeding fifteen days (15) or both such fine and imprisonment. Any person violating this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars for each violation. § 10-134.1 Prohibition on sale of box cutters to persons under twenty-one years of age, open displays of box cutters by sellers, and possession of box cutters in a public place, or on school premises by persons under twenty-two years of age. a. Legislative findings. The council hereby finds that the number of school safety incidents which take place in the city's schools are disturbingly high and are rising, and that these incidents place students and staff at unacceptable risk of injury and disrupt the learning environment. Board of education statistics reveal that for the first half of the 1994-95 school year, 8,333 school safety incidents occurred, representing a 27.6 percent increase as compared with the same period in the prior year. Board of education statistics also reveal that for the entire 1994-95 school year, 19,814 school safety incidents were reported, representing an increase of 16 percent as compared to the prior school year. The council further finds that the board of education's school safety statistics reveal that over 2,000 box cutters and other similar implements were seized during the 1994-95 school year, indicating that these instruments have become the weapon of choice in the city's schools. These implements are used as weapons by students as they are relatively inexpensive, readily available, and easily deployable. Used as weapons, box cutters and similar instruments can cause great injury. It is the council's belief that banning the sale of box cutters to minors under eighteen year of age, requiring that those who sell box cutters ensure that they are not displayed in a manner that increases opportunities for minors to steal them, and banning the possession of box cutters by persons under twenty-two years of age on school premises, will significantly help in reducing the number of violent school safety incidents and in ensuring that schools are the safe havens of knowledge and education that children need and deserve. b. Definitions. For purposes of this section: (1) Box cutter means any knife consisting of a razor blade, retractable, nonretractable, or detachable in segments, attached to or contained within a plastic or metal housing, including utility knives, snap-off knives, and box cart cutters. (2) Person means any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm, organization or other legal entity. (3) Public place means a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, playground, and any hallway, lobby and other portion of an apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence. (4) School premises means the buildings, grounds, or facilities, or any portion thereof, owned, occupied by, or under the custody or control of public and private institutions for the primary purpose of providing educational instruction to students, and any vehicles owned, operated or leased by such institutions which are used to transport such students or the personnel of such institutions. c. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell or cause any person to sell or offer to sell a box cutter to any individual under twenty-one years of age. d. No person who sells or offers for sale box cutters shall place such box cutters on open display so that such implements are accessible to the public without the assistance of such seller, or his or her employee or other agent, offering such implement for sale; provided, however, that the restrictions of this subdivision shall not apply to those box cutters on open display (1) which are clearly and fully visible from a place of payment for goods or services or customer information at which such seller or an employee or other agent of such seller is usually present during hours when the public is invited or (2) which are in a package, box or other container provided by the manufacturer, importer or packager that is larger than 41 square inches. e. It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-two years of age to possess a box cutter on school premises, and unlawful for any person under twenty-one years of age to possess a box cutter while in a public place; provided, however, that nothing in this subdivision shall preclude: (1) the temporary transfer on school premises of such an instrument to a person under twenty-two years of age for a valid instructional, or school- related purpose where such device is used only under the supervision of a school staff person or other authorized instructor; or (2) the possession or use of such an instrument in a public place by any person under twenty-one years of age or on school premises by any person under twenty-two years of age so long as it occurs under circumstances in which such person is performing work on such premises during the course of his or her employment, and such instrument is used only under the supervision of his or her employer or such employer's agent or a school staff person. f. When a person is found to possess a box cutter while in a public place in violation of subdivision e of this section, it is an affirmative defense that: (1) such person is traveling to or from school premises, where it was or will be used for a valid instructional or school related purpose and used only under the supervision of a school staff member or other authorized instructor, and such person has not displayed the box cutter in a menacing or threatening manner, or in a manner that a reasonable person would believe manifests an intent to use such box cutter for a criminal purpose; or (2) such person is traveling to or from his or her place of employment, where it was or will be used during the course of such employment and used only under the supervision of his or her employer or such employer's agent, and such person has not displayed the box cutter in a menacing or threatening manner, or in a manner that a reasonable person would believe manifests an intent to use such box cutter for a criminal purpose. g. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. § 10-134.2 Regulation of laser pointers. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section: (1) Laser pointer means any device that emits light amplified by the stimulated emission of radiation that is visible to the human eye. (2) Person means any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm, organization or other legal entity. (3) Public place means a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, place of amusement, park, playground, and any hallway, lobby and other portion of an apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence. (4) School premises means the buildings, grounds or facilities, or any portion thereof, owned, occupied by, or under the custody or control of public or private institutions for the primary purpose of providing educational or recreational instruction to students, and any vehicles owned, operated or leased by or on behalf of such institutions that are used to transport such students or the personnel of such institutions. b. It shall be unlawful for any person to give, sell or offer to sell or cause any person to give, sell or offer to sell a laser pointer to any individual eighteen years of age or younger. c. No person who sells or offers for sale laser pointers shall place such laser pointers on open display so that such laser pointers are accessible to the public without the assistance of such seller, or his or her employee or other agent, offering such laser pointers for sale, unless: (1) such laser pointers on open display are clearly and fully visible from a place of payment for goods or services or customer information at which such seller or an employee or other agent of such seller is usually present during hours when the public is invited or (2) such laser pointers are in a package, box or other container provided by the manufacturer, importer or packager that is larger than forty-one square inches. Further, it shall be unlawful to display laser pointers in any manner or to post a sign advertising the availability of laser pointers unless a notice has been posted, in a form and manner prescribed by rule of the department of consumer and worker protection, indicating that the sale or giving of laser pointers to persons eighteen years of age or younger is a misdemeanor. d. It shall be unlawful for any person twenty years of age or younger to possess a laser pointer on school premises, unlawful for any person eighteen years of age or younger to possess a laser pointer while in a public place and unlawful for any person to direct light emitted from a laser pointer into or through a public place; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall preclude: (1) the temporary transfer on school premises of a laser pointer to, or possession on school premises of a laser pointer by, a person twenty years of age or younger for a valid instructional, school-related or employment purpose, where such laser pointer is used under the supervision of a school staff person, other authorized instructor, employer or employer's agent; or (2) the temporary transfer in a public place of a laser pointer to, or possession in a public place of a laser pointer by, a person eighteen years of age or younger, during such person's hours of employment, for a valid employment purpose, where such laser pointer is used under the supervision of the employer or employer's agent; or (3) the direction of light from a laser pointer into or through a public place by a person nineteen years of age or older, during such person's hours of employment, for a valid employment purpose. e. It shall be unlawful for any person to direct light from a laser pointer at a uniformed police officer, uniformed security guard, uniformed school safety officer, uniformed traffic enforcement agent, uniformed member of a paid or volunteer fire department, uniformed emergency medical service worker or uniformed ambulance worker, or other uniformed city, state or federal peace officer, investigator or emergency service worker, or the marked service vehicle of any such individual. f. When a person is found to possess a laser pointer while in a public place or on school premises in violation of subdivision d of this section, it is an affirmative defense that: (1) such person was traveling to or from school premises, where the laser pointer would have been or was used for a valid instructional, school- related or employment purpose under the supervision of a school staff person, other authorized instructor, employer or employer's agent, and such person had not turned on the laser pointer or displayed it in a menacing or threatening manner; or (2) such person was traveling to or from his or her place of employment, where the laser pointer would have been or was used during such person's hours of employment, for a valid employment purpose, under the supervision of the employer or employer's agent, and such person had not turned on the laser pointer or displayed it in a menacing or threatening manner. g. Authorized agents and employees of the department of consumer and worker protection, and of any other agency designated by the mayor, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of subdivisions b and c of this section. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty pursuant to this section shall be commenced by the service of a notice of hearing that shall be returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department of consumer and worker protection. The administrative tribunal of the department shall have the power to impose civil penalties for a violation of subdivision b or c of this section as follows: not more than three hundred dollars for the first violation; not more than five hundred dollars for the second violation by the same person within a two-year period; and not more than one thousand dollars for the third and all subsequent violations by the same person within a two- year period. For purposes of determining whether a violation of subdivision b or subdivision c of this section should be adjudicated as a second, third or subsequent violation, violations of subdivision b and violations of subdivision c of this section by the same person within a two-year period shall be aggregated. h. Any person who violates subdivision b, c or e of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who violates subdivision d of this section shall be guilty of a violation for a first offense and a misdemeanor for all subsequent offenses. § 10-135 Prohibition on sale and possession of electronic stun guns. a. As used in this section, electronic stun gun shall mean any device designed primarily as a weapon, the purpose of which is to stun, render unconscious or paralyze a person by passing an electronic shock to such person, but shall not include an electronic dart gun as such term is defined in section 265.00 of the penal law. b. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale or to have in his or her possession within the jurisdiction of the city any electronic stun gun. c. Violation of this section shall be a class A misdemeanor. d. The provisions of this section prohibiting the possession of electronic stun guns shall not apply to police officers as defined in the criminal procedure law, who are operating under regular department procedure or operation guidelines established by their department. e. The provisions of this section shall not apply to manufacturers of electronic stun guns or importers and exporters or merchants of electronic stun guns, when such stun guns are scheduled to travel in the course of international, interstate, or intrastate commerce to a point outside the city. Such bulk shipments shall remain in their original shipping package, unopened, except for inspection and possible subdivision for further movement in interstate or intrastate commerce to a point outside the city. § 10-136 Prohibition against certain forms of aggressive solicitation. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section: (1) Aggressive manner shall mean: (a) Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during or after soliciting, asking or begging, if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to (i) fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of property, or the commission of any offense as defined in section ten of the penal law upon oneself or another, or (ii) otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value, or (iii) suffer unreasonable inconvenience, annoyance or alarm; (b) Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person or an occupied vehicle without that person's consent in the course of soliciting, asking or begging; (c) Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; or (d) Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited. (2) Solicit, ask or beg shall include using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures, signs or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value or soliciting the sale of goods or services. (3) Public place shall mean a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, playground, and any hallway, lobby and other portion of an apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence. (4) Bank shall mean any banking corporation as defined in section 11-164 of the code. (5) Check cashing business shall mean any person duly licensed by the superintendent of banks to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts or money orders for consideration pursuant to the provisions of article 9-A of the banking law. (6) Automated teller machine shall mean a device, linked to a financial institution's account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments. (7) Automated teller machine facility shall mean the area comprised of one or more automated teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours. b. Prohibited acts. (1) No person shall solicit, ask or beg in an aggressive manner in any public place. (2) No person shall solicit, ask or beg within ten feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing business during its business hours or within ten feet of any automated teller machine during the time it is available for customers' use. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. Provided further that no person shall solicit, ask or beg within an automated teller machine facility where a reasonable person would or should know that he or she does not have the permission to do so from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such facility. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prohibit the lawful vending of goods and services within such areas. (3) No person shall approach an operator or other occupant of a motor vehicle while such vehicle is located on any street, for the purpose of either performing or offering to perform a service in connection with such vehicle or otherwise soliciting the sale of goods or services, if such approaching, performing, offering or soliciting is done in an aggressive manner as defined in paragraph one of subdivision a of this section. Provided, however, that this paragraph shall not apply to services rendered in connection with the lawful towing of such vehicle or in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or other occupant of such vehicle. c. Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any unenclosed automated teller machine located within any building, structure or space whose primary purpose or function is unrelated to banking activities, including but not limited to supermarkets, airports and school buildings, provided that such automated teller machine shall be available for use only during the regular hours of operation of the building, structure or space in which such machine is located. d. Penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than sixteen days or by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars, or by both. § 10-137 Prevention of harassment on school premises. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Department shall mean the New York city department of education. 2. Gender shall mean actual or perceived sex and shall also include a person's gender identity, self-image, appearance, behavior or expression, whether or not that gender identity, self-image, appearance, behavior or expression is different from that traditionally associated with the legal sex assigned to that person at birth. 3. Harassment shall mean the creation of a hostile environment by, in whole or in part, conduct or verbal threats, taunting, intimidation or abuse, including conduct, verbal threats, intimidation or abuse for any reason, including, but not limited to, a person's actual or perceived race, color, national origin, ethnic group, religion, religious practice, disability, sexual orientation, gender, sex, family composition or circumstance, economic circumstance, physical characteristic, medical condition, school performance or any other characteristic or reason that has or would reasonably have the effect of substantially interfering with a student's educational performance, opportunities or benefits, or a student's mental, emotional or physical well- being, or that reasonably causes or would reasonably be expected to cause a student or other person to fear for his or her physical safety. 4. Retaliatory action shall mean, but not be limited to, dismissal, demotion, suspension, disciplinary action, negative performance evaluation, any action resulting in loss of staff, compensation or other benefit, failure to hire, failure to appoint, failure to promote, or transfer or assignment or failure to transfer or assign against the wishes of the affected person. 5. School shall mean each school within the New York city public school system that provides educational instruction to students at or below the twelfth grade level. 6. School function shall mean a school-sponsored extra-curricular event or activity or any event that takes place on school premises. 7. School premises shall mean the buildings, grounds or facilities, or any portion thereof, owned, occupied by, or under the custody or control of the department or of a school, used for the primary purpose of providing educational instruction to students at or below the twelfth grade level, and any vehicles owned, operated or leased by or on behalf of such institutions that are used to transport such students or the personnel of such institutions. School premises shall also include public transportation, such as subways, buses and ferries, when students use such public transportation to attend school or a school function. b. Prohibition of harassment. No person shall subject another person to harassment on school premises or at a school function. c. Policies and guidelines. 1. The chancellor of the city public school system shall create policies and guidelines, in accordance with the procedures set forth in subdivision three of section 2801 of the New York state education law, designed to create an environment for each school that is free from harassment. Such policies and guidelines shall include, but not be limited to, penalties or disciplinary measures for those found to have violated such policies and guidelines, and shall indicate when incidents of harassment must be reported to law enforcement authorities. Such policies and guidelines shall also specify that harassment is a basis for granting to a student who has been harassed a transfer to another school, commonly called a safety transfer, and that harassment is a basis for disciplining any student who engages or has engaged in the harassment of others. 2. Such policies and guidelines required by paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall also: (i) include guidelines to be used in employee training programs, which training shall be given on a regular basis to all pedagogical staff and school safety officers to discourage the development of harassment by (a) raising the awareness and sensitivity of school employees to potential harassment, and (b) enabling employees to prevent and respond to harassment; (ii) include guidelines to be used in presentations given to students about conduct and harassment issues; such guidelines shall be designed to discourage the development of harassment by (a) raising the awareness and sensitivity of pupils regarding potential harassment, and (b) fostering empathy and empathetic conduct among students; (iii) be included in the code of conduct which the chancellor is required to disseminate pursuant to subdivision four of section 2801 of the New York state education law; (iv) be included in mail to parents or guardians of students at each school at the beginning of each school year, be posted in prominent places within each school and be translated and made available in the ten most common languages spoken in New York city and in any other language spoken by more than ten percent of the parents or guardians of children attending any individual school; and (v) be distributed to all staff, school safety officers and members of school safety committees. 3. The chancellor of the city public school system shall appoint the principal of each school as the person responsible for ensuring the dissemination of the anti-harassment policies and guidelines to all staff of each school, all school safety officers, all members of the school safety committee, and to all students and their parents or guardians, and for providing training to pedagogical staff and school safety officers. Such principal shall also ensure that the name and contact information of a school employee who can provide copies of such policies and guidelines is made available to all students, parents, guardians, staff and to the school safety committee. Such principal may designate a subordinate to assume the responsibilities required by this paragraph. d. Reporting. 1. The chancellor of the city public school system shall appoint the principal of each school as the enforcement officer responsible for ensuring the enforcement of the anti-harassment policies and guidelines established pursuant to subdivision c of this section and to whom reports of incidents of harassment on school premises or at a school function may be made. Each such principal may designate a subordinate to assume these responsibilities. The chancellor shall also appoint the superintendent of each region and/or district within his or her jurisdiction or the designee of such superintendent, as the person to whom reports of incidents of harassment on school premises or at a school function may be made when such report concerns the principal or other person appointed or designated as the enforcement officer of a school. 2. The chancellor shall create procedures under which incidents of harassment on school premises or at school functions are tracked centrally for record keeping purposes, and procedures under which such incidents of harassment are reported promptly to the principal or his or her designee, or the superintendent of each region and/or district or his or her designee, who must complete, for each such incident, an incident report indicating information about the incident, including, but not limited to, the parties, the location where such incident took place, the date and time such incident occurred and type of harassment involved. 3. By no later than July 30 of each year, the department shall publish a statistical summary of all incidents of harassment that occurred on school premises or at a school function during the preceding school year. Such summary report shall indicate, at a minimum, the number and nature of incidents of harassment broken down by school, school district, region, borough and grade level, and shall be published on the department's website and by such other means as, in the chancellor's discretion, are reasonably determined to best disseminate such information to the public. 4. The department shall also include, on each school's annual report card or any similar document that the department creates, summary information about incidents of harassment at such school, which information shall include (i) a comparison of all incidents of harassment at such school with all incidents of harassment in all similar schools, as determined by the department and (ii) the number of safety transfers that were granted from such school to another school during the preceding school year. e. Protection of people who report incidents of harassment. Any person subjected to harassment or having reasonable cause to suspect that another person has been subjected to harassment on school premises or at a school function, who reasonably and in good faith either reports such information to appropriate school officials or to law enforcement authorities, or who initiates, testifies, participates or assists in any formal or informal proceedings pursuant to this section, shall not be liable for civil damages that may arise from the making of such report or from initiating, testifying, participating or assisting in such formal or informal proceedings, and no school official or employee shall take, request or cause a retaliatory action against any such person who either makes such a report or initiates, testifies, participates or assists in such formal or informal proceeding. § 10-137 Prohibition on the sale or installation of audible burglar alarms for motor vehicles. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section: (1) audible burglar alarm for a motor vehicle shall mean any sound signal device designed and intended to produce an audible response upon unauthorized entry into a motor vehicle. (2) dealer shall mean a person selling or leasing and distributing motor vehicles primarily to purchasers that in good faith purchase the vehicles other than for resale. (3) manufacturer shall mean any person manufacturing or assembling motor vehicles. (4) motor vehicle shall mean any device that is propelled by an engine in or upon which a person or material may be transported on the ground and which is intended to be operated upon a public highway. (5) person shall mean an individual, partnership, company, corporation, association, firm, organization or any principal, director, officer, partner, member or employee thereof. b. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer or display for sale or cause any other person to sell or offer or display for sale an audible burglar alarm for a motor vehicle that: i. is not capable of automatically terminating its audible response within three minutes of its being activated; ii. is capable of being activated by means other than direct physical contact with such motor vehicle or through the use of an individual remote activation device that is designed to be used with the audible burglar alarm system of a particular vehicle which alarm shall be capable of and shall terminate its audible response within three minutes of its being activated; or iii. is set to automatically terminate its audible response more than three minutes after its being activated. (2) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a manufacturer, to install or cause any person to install an audible burglar alarm for a motor vehicle that: i. is not capable of automatically terminating its audible response within three minutes of its being activated; ii. is capable of being activated by means other than direct physical contact with such motor vehicle or through the use of an individual remote activation device that is designed to be used with the audible burglar alarm system of a particular vehicle which alarm shall be capable of and shall terminate its audible response within three minutes of its being activated; or iii. after completion of installation, is not set to automatically terminate its audible response within three minutes of its being activated. (3) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer or display for sale, or install or cause any other person to sell, offer or display for sale, or install any component that when added to an audible burglar alarm for a motor vehicle would cause such alarm to not meet the requirements of subdivision d of section 24-221 of this code. c. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision b of this section, any dealer or any person who prior to the effective date of this section installed an audible burglar alarm for a motor vehicle that does not comply with subdivision b of this section and who, at the time the audible burglar alarm for a motor vehicle was installed, provided a warranty for the replacement or repair of such alarm that commenced upon the installation of such alarm, shall be authorized to replace or repair such alarm in accordance with the terms of such warranty. (2) Any dealer or any person to which the provisions of paragraph one of this subdivision apply shall maintain a record of all repairs and replacements of such audible burglar alarm for a motor vehicle performed in accordance with the terms of a warranty. Such records shall include the effective date and expiration date of the warranty, the date on which such repair or replacement was performed and such other information as the police commissioner may require by rule. These records shall be retained for a period of seven years, or such longer period as the police commissioner may establish by rule. d. (1) Any person who violates subdivision b of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars for the first violation, not less than one thousand dollars nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars for the second violation and not less than two thousand five hundred dollars nor more than five thousand dollars for the third and each subsequent violation. (2) Each sale, offer or display for sale, or installation of an audible burglar alarm for a motor vehicle made or caused to be made in violation of subdivision b of this section shall be deemed a separate violation and a separate civil penalty shall be imposed for each such violation. e. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the police department and the department of consumer and worker protection. f. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty pursuant to this section shall be commenced by the service of a notice of hearing that shall be returnable to an administrative tribunal of the office of administrative trials and hearings. § 10-138 Distribution of a Model Code of Conduct to participants in youth sports programs. a. Legislative findings and intent. Participation in youth sports programs should be a rewarding experience. Through sports programs, our youth learn the importance of teamwork, cooperation, effort, discipline and commitment. Furthermore, regular physical activity is the cornerstone of an active and healthy lifestyle. Unfortunately, good sportsmanship is sometimes lacking on the part of coaches, parents, players, spectators and other persons involved in youth sports programs, resulting in the creation of a hostile environment for participants. The City Council finds that in order to realize the full potential and value of youth sports programs, participants in such programs should follow a Code of Conduct that reflects principles of good sportsmanship at all youth sports events. Furthermore, the City Council finds that organizations that administer youth sports programs should have the option of banning coaches, parents, players, spectators and other participants in youth sports programs from attending youth sports events if they engage in certain egregious behavior at such events. Additionally, such organizations should have the option of requiring individuals to complete some form of anger management counseling before being allowed to resume attendance at youth sports events. b. Definitions. For purposes of this section: (1) The term youth shall mean any person under the age of eighteen. (2) The term organization shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, trust, association, corporation or other entity. (3) The term youth sports event shall mean a competition, practice or instructional event involving one or more youth sports teams, where such youth sports teams utilize city facilities and/or receive city funding. c. Any organization that administers a youth sports program that utilizes city facilities and/or receives city funding shall distribute the following Model Code of Conduct or a similar Code of Conduct containing guidelines for conduct of behavior to be observed at youth sports events to all coaches, parents and players participating in such sports program: Model Code of Conduct 1. All officials, coaches, parents, players, spectators and participants shall respect one another. 2. All officials, coaches, parents, players, spectators and participants shall respect officials' decisions. 3. All officials, coaches, parents, players, spectators and participants shall engage in fair play and abide by all game rules. 4. All officials, coaches, parents, players, spectators and participants shall refrain from engaging in taunting of officials, coaches, parents, players, spectators or other participants by means of baiting or ridiculing. 5. All officials, coaches, parents, players, spectators and participants shall refrain from verbal and/or profane abuse of officials, coaches, parents, players, spectators or other participants. 6. All officials, coaches, parents, players, spectators and participants shall refrain from threatening physical violence or engaging in any form of physical violence. 7. All officials, coaches, parents, players, spectators and participants shall win and lose with good sportsmanship and shall strive to make youth sports programs rewarding for all participants. d. Any organization that administers a youth sports program that utilizes city facilities or receives city funding shall post or affix the Model Code of Conduct or a similar Code of Conduct containing guidelines for conduct of behavior to be observed at youth sports events at the primary facility where such youth sports events occur, as practicable. e. Any organization that administers a youth sports program that utilizes city facilities and/or receives city funding may ban the presence at youth sports events of any official, coach, parent, player, spectator or other participant who (1) engages in verbal or physical threats or abuse aimed at any official, coach, parent, player, spectator or other participant, (2) initiates a fight or scuffle with any official, coach, parent, player, spectator or other participant or (3) engages in repeated and egregious violations of the Model Code of Conduct or similar Code of Conduct containing guidelines for conduct of behavior to be observed at youth sports events, if the conduct occurs at or in connection with such youth sports event. f. In the event that any official, coach, parent, player, spectator or other participant is banned from attending youth sports events pursuant to subdivision (e) of this section, such person may petition the organization that imposed such ban for permission to resume attendance. Prior to being permitted to resume attendance, such organization may require such person to present proof of completion of anger management counseling or its equivalent. § 10-145 Licensing and regulation of towing cars repealed. § 10-146 Sale of motor vehicles to unlicensed minors. Any person who sells or gives any motor vehicle or motorcycle to any minor under eighteen years of age who has not been licensed to operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle within the city of New York, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars, imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. § 10-147 Possession of handcuffs, thumb-cuffs or leg irons by unauthorized persons prohibited. a. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess any type of handcuffs, including disposable cinch cuffs, thumb cuffs or leg irons. This section shall not prohibit the possession of toy handcuffs which by their construction cannot be used to restrain an individual. b. The prohibition of this section shall not apply to the following persons: 1. any peace officer, police officer or any person appointed as a police officer by the superintendent of state police; or 2. any police officer or peace officer of another state while conducting official business within the state of New York; or 3. any employee of the city, charged with the care or custody of a juvenile committed to a secure detention facility, while on duty or while traveling to or from his or her assigned duty; or 4. any person in military service or other service of the state, or of the United States, in pursuit of official duty or when duly authorized by federal or state law, regulation or ordered to possess the same articles prohibited by this section; or 5. any member of the auxiliary police force; or 6. any special patrolman appointed by the police commissioner, while on duty or while traveling to or from his or her assigned place of duty; or 7. any licensed private investigator or any employee of a watch, guard, or patrol agency licensed by the secretary of state under article seven of the general business law, or any employee of a person, firm or corporation operating an armored car transportation service, while such person is acting in the course of his or her employment or is traveling to or from his or her place of employment; and 8. any employee of a person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of manufacturing, selling or transporting such handcuffs, including disposable cinch cuffs, thumb cuffs or leg irons, which are intended for possession by persons authorized by this section, while such person is acting in the course or his or her employment or is traveling to or from his or her place of employment; or 9. any person engaged in a business activity which requires the utilization of such handcuffs, including disposable cinch cuffs, thumbcuffs or leg irons as authorized pursuant to regulations promulgated by the police commissioner, while such person is acting in the course of his or her employment or is traveling to or from his or her place of employment. c. Any person found in violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars nor more than two hundred dollars or imprisonment of not more than ten days or both. § 10-148 Fines for unlawful cutting of trees on city property other than trees under the jurisdiction of the department of parks and recreation. It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm, corporation, agent, employee or person under the control of such individual, firm or corporation to cut, remove or in any way destroy or cause to be destroyed, any tree or other form of vegetation on any public property, without acquiring written consent from the agency having jurisdiction or control of such property. The foregoing provision shall not apply to employees of any agency who are engaged in the proper and authorized performance of their assigned duties. § 10-149 Violation. a. Any individual, firm, corporation, agent, employee or person under the control of such individual, firm or corporation violating the provisions of section 10-148 of this code concerning a tree shall be liable to arrest and upon conviction thereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifteen thousand dollars or by imprisonment of not more than one year or by both such fine and imprisonment for each such violation. Such individual, firm, corporation, agent, employee or person under the control of such individual, firm or corporation shall also be liable for a civil penalty of not more than ten thousand dollars for each such violation which may be recovered in a proceeding before the environmental control board. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized by this section shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the environmental control board. The environmental control board shall have the power to impose the civil penalties prescribed herein. b. Any individual, firm, corporation, agent, employee or person under the control of such individual, firm or corporation violating the provisions of section 10-148 of this code concerning any other form of vegetation shall be liable to arrest and upon conviction thereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment of not more than ninety days or by both such fine and imprisonment for each such violation. c. Any individual, firm, corporation, agent, employee or person under the control of such individual, firm or corporation found to be guilty of violating the provisions of section 10-148 of this code or subdivision a of section 18-129 of this code by a court of competent jurisdiction or by the environmental control board shall be denied the opportunity to obtain written consent from the commissioner of parks and recreation or from an agency having control of public property to cut, remove or in any way destroy or cause to be destroyed, any tree or other form of vegetation on such property for a maximum of two years from the date of conviction, or from the date the civil penalty was imposed. § 10-150 Declaration and findings; election for non-public office. The council hereby finds that it is in the public interest to hold certain elections on days other than those which the vast majority of the people of the city respect as a day of worship and a day of rest. The holding of elections on such days of worship is unfair to those citizens who observe such days of worship in that they are unable to participate fully in the election process on an equal basis unless they violate their religious precepts. This poses a threat to the free exercise of religion and equality of access to the electoral process. The council further finds and declares that bigotry, prejudice and intolerance will be discouraged if such elections are forbidden on those days of worship, and that holding elections on other days will permit the participation of a greater number of people. § 10-151 Elections for non-public office or position. a. It shall be unlawful to conduct any election for a non-public office or position on Friday after sundown, Saturday or Sunday in which members of the general public are eligible to cast a vote by virtue of the fact that they reside in a particular area of the city. b. It shall be unlawful for any person to direct, mandate, supervise or assist in conducting any such elections. § 10-152 Penalty. a. Any person who shall violate any provision of section 10-151, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or imprisonment for not more than ten days, or both such fine and imprisonment. b. The results of any election held in violation of section 10-151 shall be null and void. § 10-153 First aid kits on vehicles for hire. a. All motor vehicles for hire, used to transport any persons, with a seating capacity of ten or more persons, including the driver, whether by charter or for a term of months shall provide equipment and maintain on board the vehicle at all times, a complete first aid kit containing all that equipment reasonably calculated to provide emergency medical aid to injured persons. b. Any person, firm or corporation, convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of one hundred dollars or imprisonment for thirty days or both such fine and imprisonment. § 10-154 False statements in certificates, forms, written statements, applications or reports. Any person who shall knowingly make a false statement or who shall knowingly falsify or allow to be falsified any certificate, form, signed statement, application or report required under the provisions of this code or any rule or regulation of any agency promulgated thereunder, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or imprisonment of a term of not more than sixty days or both. § 10-155 Public nuisance defined repealed.§ 10-156 Powers of the police commissioner with respect to public nuisances repealed. § 10-157 Bicycles used for commercial purposes. a. For purposes of this section and section 10-157.1, the following terms have the following meanings: Bicycle. The term bicycle has the same meaning as in section 19-176, and also means any wheeled device propelled exclusively by human power as well as any motor-assisted device that is not capable of being registered by the New York state department of motor vehicles. Bicycle operator. The term bicycle operator means a person who delivers packages, parcels, papers, or articles of any type by bicycle on behalf of a business using a bicycle for commercial purposes and who is paid by such business. Business using a bicycle for commercial purposes. The term business using a bicycle for commercial purposes means a person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, or other entity that, either on behalf of itself or others, delivers packages, parcels, papers, or articles of any type by bicycle. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as applying to persons under the age of sixteen who use a bicycle only to deliver daily newspapers or circulars. b. A business using a bicycle for commercial purposes that does not have a site within the city that is open and available to the public must provide to the department of transportation, upon a form prescribed by the department, the following information: (1) the name under which such business is authorized to do business in the state, pursuant to the business corporation law, (2) the registered agent upon whom process against such business may be served and the address of such agent, or, if the business has designated the secretary of state as its agent for receiving such process, the post office address to which the secretary of state may mail a copy of such process, and (3) any other information requested by the department. c. A business using a bicycle for commercial purposes must assign to each of its bicycle operators a three digit identification number, except that the department of transportation may promulgate a rule to require an identification number with four or more digits. Such business must issue to each of its bicycle operators an identification card that contains the name, identification number and photo of the bicycle operator and the name, address and telephone number of such business. A bicycle operator shall carry such identification card while making deliveries or otherwise operating a bicycle on behalf of any such business. A bicycle operator shall be required to produce such identification card upon the demand of an authorized employee of the police department or department of transportation or any other person authorized by law. d. A business using a bicycle for commercial purposes shall maintain a roster of its bicycle operators. Such roster shall include for each such bicycle operator: name; home address; start date; discharge date, if applicable; identification number; and date of completion of the bicycle safety course required by paragraph 3 of subdivision e of this section. Such roster shall be made available for inspection upon request of an authorized employee of the police department or department of transportation or any other person authorized by law. e. (1) A business using a bicycle for commercial purposes shall provide at its own expense or ensure the availability of protective headgear suitable for each of its bicycle operators. Such business may not require any of its bicycle operators to provide such headgear at such operator's expense. Such headgear shall: (i) meet the standards set forth by the consumer product safety commission in title 16, part 1203 of the code of federal regulations; and (ii) be replaced if such headgear is no longer in good condition. Headgear is no longer in good condition if it is missing any of its component parts or is otherwise damaged so as to impair its functionality. (2) Each bicycle operator shall wear protective headgear that meets the requirements of paragraph 1 of this subdivision while making deliveries or otherwise operating a bicycle on behalf of a business using a bicycle for commercial purposes. The term wear protective headgear means having the headgear fastened securely upon the head with the headgear straps. (3) Each bicycle operator shall complete a bicycle safety course prior to making deliveries or otherwise operating a bicycle on behalf of a business using a bicycle for commercial purposes. For purposes of this section, bicycle safety course shall mean information provided by the department of transportation regarding safe bicycling and adherence to traffic and commercial bicycle laws. (4) The commissioner of transportation shall post on the department of transportation's website the content of the bicycle safety course required by this section. f. A business using a bicycle for commercial purposes, notwithstanding that a bicycle may be provided by any of its bicycle operators, shall provide at its own expense or ensure that each bicycle is equipped with: a lamp; a bell or other device capable of giving an audible signal from a distance of at least one hundred feet, provided however that a siren or whistle shall not be used; brakes; reflective tires or, alternately, a reflex reflector mounted on the spokes of each wheel; as well as other devices or material in accordance with section 1236 of the vehicle and traffic law. Such business may not require any of its bicycle operators to provide such equipment at such operator's expense. g. A business using a bicycle for commercial purposes shall be responsible for the compliance with the provisions of this section of its bicycle operators. (1) Violation of any of the provisions of this section by any such business, or of any of the rules or regulations that may be promulgated pursuant hereto, shall be a violation triable by a judge of the criminal court of the city of New York and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days or both such fine and imprisonment. (2) Any such business that violates any of the provisions of this section or any of the rules promulgated pursuant hereto, except subdivision d of this section and any of the rules promulgated pursuant to such subdivision, shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100. Any such business that violates a provision of this section or rule promulgated pursuant hereto more than 30 days after such business has already violated the same provision or rule shall be subject to an additional civil penalty of $250. Any such business that violates subdivision d of this section or any of the rules promulgated pursuant hereto shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100, except that with respect to first time violations of such subdivision, the commissioner of transportation shall notify such business of such violation and request that action be taken to correct such violation in such a manner within 30 days and shall afford such business an opportunity to contest the commissioner’s finding in a manner set forth in the rules of the department of transportation. Civil penalties issued pursuant to this paragraph may be in addition to any criminal penalty imposed, and shall be recoverable against such business in an action or proceeding in any court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction or the environmental control board. h. Any bicycle operator who makes deliveries or otherwise operates a bicycle on behalf of a business using a bicycle for commercial purposes without carrying the identification card required by subdivision c of this section, or who fails to produce such identification card upon demand pursuant to such subdivision, or who fails to wear protective headgear required by subdivision e of this section or the retro-reflective apparel required by subdivision i of this section, shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be liable for a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50. It shall be an affirmative defense to such traffic infraction that such business did not provide the protective headgear, the identification card or the retro- reflective apparel required by subdivisions c, e or i of this section. Such traffic infraction may be adjudicated by an administrative tribunal authorized under article 2-A of the vehicle and traffic law. i. A business using a bicycle for commercial purposes shall provide for and require each of its bicycle operators to wear, and each such bicycle operator shall wear, a retro-reflective jacket, vest, or other wearing apparel on the upper part of such operator's body as the outermost garment while making deliveries or otherwise operating a bicycle on behalf of such business, the back of which shall indicate such business's name and such bicycle operator's individual identification number as assigned pursuant to subdivision c of this section in lettering and numerals not less than one inch in height so as to be plainly readable at a distance of not less than ten feet. j. The provisions of this section shall be enforceable by an authorized employee of the police department or department of transportation or any other person authorized by law. k. A business using a bicycle for commercial purposes shall not possess any motorized scooter and shall not permit any person to operate a motorized scooter on behalf of such business. A business using a bicycle for commercial purposes shall be liable for any violation of section 19-176.2(b) committed by any person operating a motorized scooter on behalf of such business. For purposes of this section, motorized scooter shall be as defined in section 19-176.2. l. A business using a bicycle for commercial purposes shall provide to its bicycle operators the materials identified by the department of consumer and worker protection pursuant to subdivision a of section 20-1525. Unless such business has already provided such materials pursuant to subdivision b of section 20-1525, such business shall provide such materials to its bicycle operators no later than sixty days after such department publishes such materials pursuant to subdivision a of section 20-1525. Such materials shall be provided in English, the designated citywide languages as defined in section 23-1101, and any additional languages in which such materials have been published by the department of consumer and worker protection. §10-157.1 Signs with bicycle safety procedures. a. A business using a bicycle for commercial purposes, as defined in subdivision a of section 10-157, shall post one or more signs at each site of such business, provided that, if such business has only a post office address within the city, such business shall provide a written notice to each of its bicycle operators. Such sign or notice shall summarize: (1) the responsibilities of bicycle operators and businesses using a bicycle for commercial purposes pursuant to section 10-157; and (2) the provisions of the vehicle and traffic law, administrative code of the city of New York and department of transportation traffic rules and regulations that the commissioner of transportation in his or her discretion determines are most important for the safe operation of bicycles in the city. The department of transportation shall post on its website the provisions required to be summarized on such sign or notice under this subdivision. b. Every sign or notice required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall be: (1) in English and Spanish and any other language spoken predominantly by any bicycle operator of a business using a bicycle for commercial purposes; and (2) in the case of a sign, posted in a manner conspicuous to such business's bicycle operators and to patrons of such business present at the business site; or (3) in the case of a notice, provided to such business's bicycle operators. c. The commissioner of transportation shall promulgate such rules and regulations as may be required to effectuate the purposes of this section, including rules and regulations governing the content, size and manner of display of signs required pursuant to this section and shall make a model sign available on the department of transportation's website. d. (1) The violation of any provision of subdivision a or b of this section, or of any of the rules or regulations that may be promulgated pursuant hereto, shall be a violation triable by a judge of the criminal court of the city of New York and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days or both such fine and imprisonment. (2) The violation of any provision of subdivision a or b of this section or any of the rules or regulations promulgated pursuant hereto shall be punishable by a civil penalty of $100 and a second or subsequent violation of the same provision of this section or rule promulgated pursuant hereto more than 30 days after such prior violation shall be punishable by an additional civil penalty of $100. With respect to first time violations of such subdivisions or rules, the commissioner of transportation shall notify a business using a bicycle for commercial purposes of such violation and request that action be taken to correct such violation in such a manner within 30 days and shall afford such business an opportunity to contest the commissioner’s finding in a manner set forth in the rules of the department of transportation. Such civil penalties may be in addition to any criminal penalty imposed, and shall be recoverable against such business in an action or proceeding in any court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction or the environmental control board. e. The provisions of this section shall be enforceable by an authorized employee of the police department or department of transportation or any other person authorized by law. § 10-158 Vessel regulation zone. a. Description. That portion of the body of water contained within the county of the Bronx, known as the lagoon within pelham bay park, whose limits are: on the northeast, latitude 40° 52' 40, longitude 73° 47'; on the northwest, latitude 40° 52' 57, longitude 73° 47' 38 on the southeast, latitude 40° 51' 54, longitude 73° 49' 12 and on the southwest, latitude 40° 52' 4, longitude 73° 48' 25, and which does not exceed one thousand feet from the shore line at low water mark, shall be designated a vessel regulation zone, as set forth under section 46 of the navigation law of the state of New York. b. Regulation. The maximum vessel speed limit within this vessel regulation zone shall be four miles per hour. The commissioners of the police department and the department of parks and recreation shall be required to enforce said speed limit. Vessel, as defined for purposes of this section, shall not include a crew racing shell. Crew racing shell shall mean any shell, gig, barge or other boat designed primarily for practice or racing, propelled by oars or sweeps, in the sport of crew or scull racing conducted by a private or public educational institution, school, academy, college, university or association of any of the preceding or by any amateur sports club or association or by the United States or International Olympics Committee and shall not include canoes, rowboats or lifeboats. c. Posting of speed signs. There shall be posted by the commissioner of the department of parks and recreation on the shore near the boundaries of this vessel regulation zone, signboards facing the water and bearing thereon in large letters, Vessel Regulation Zone, Speed Limit 4 miles per hour. Such signboards shall be conspicuously placed and of sufficient size to be easily readable by a person using such waters. d. Penalties. Any person violating any of the regulations including the speed limit as set forth in this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars or by imprisonment for not more than ninety days or by both. e. Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vessel while actually competing in a duly authorized regatta, provided notice of such regatta has been filed with the Bronx county clerk and the department of parks and recreation at least ten days prior to the occurrence of such event and provided that no single sponsor of such regatta be allowed to conduct more than six within any calendar year. § 10-158.1 Harlem River no wake area. a. For the purposes of this section the following terms shall be defined as follows: 1. Idle speed shall mean the lowest speed at which a vessel can operate, maintain safe steerage, and minimize the production of a wake that could unreasonably interfere with or endanger other persons, property, or water-borne vessels. 2. No wake area shall mean an area in which a vessel must travel at idle speed. 3. Vessel shall mean any motorized floating craft with the exception of any motorized floating craft that (i) is used primarily as a residence, (ii) is a vessel operated by an authorized member or employee of any law enforcement or emergency services agency or organization when used in the performance of official law enforcement or emergency services duties, (iii) is provided as an accommodation, advantage, facility or privilege at any place of public accommodation, resort or amusement or (iv) is a vessel in commercial service, as defined in 46 U.S.C. § 2101. A vessel operated by an individual who is compensated to operate such vessel shall not provide sufficient cause to deem such vessel to be in commercial service. 4. Wake shall mean all changes in the vertical height of the water's surface caused by the passage of a vessel including, but not limited to, such craft's bow wave, stern wake and propeller wash. b. Swindler Cove and that portion of the Harlem River running from the University Heights Bridge southerly to the High Bridge; and that portion of the Harlem River between the Spuyten Duyvil trestle and the Broadway Bridge are hereby designated No Wake Areas. c. 1. All vessels operating within the no wake area shall be operated at idle speed. 2. The police commissioner, the commissioner of parks and recreation and the heads of such other agencies as the mayor shall designate shall have the authority to enforce paragraph one of this subdivision. d. The commissioner of parks and recreation shall post one or more signboards at or about seven hundred fifty feet from the northerly-most and southerly-most boundaries, respectively, or as closely thereto as practicable, of each such no wake area and at or about three hundred fifty feet from the northerly-most and southerly-most boundaries, respectively, or as closely thereto as practicable, of each such no wake area. Such signboards shall face the water in both directions and bear thereon, respectively, a notice indicating the distance from the no wake area and a direction to proceed at idle speed. The exact distances of such signboards shall be subject to the availability of property upon which to post such signboards. The commissioner of parks and recreation shall also post additional signboards to indicate to vessel operators the presence of a boathouse in the no wake area or the shoreline. Such signboards shall be conspicuously placed and be of sufficient size to be read easily by a person using such waters. e. Any person violating paragraph one of subdivision c of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars or by imprisonment for not more than ninety days or by both. Any such penalty shall be in addition to any penalty provided for in the New York State navigation law. f. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: 1. any vessel while actually competing in a duly authorized regatta, provided notice of such regatta has been filed with and accepted by the clerk of Bronx and New York counties, and with the United States coast guard and the department of parks and recreation, at least ten days prior to the occurrence of such event and 2. any vessel while actually engaged in safety or coaching activities § 10-158.2 Wake reduction educational material. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Operator. The term “operator” means any person or governmental entity that owns or operates a water-borne vessel. Water-borne vessel. The term “water-borne vessel” means any water craft operating within the city or its territorial waters, including any commuter ferry, tugboat, speedboat, motorboat and personal watercraft, but excluding any seaplane. b. The commissioner of parks and recreation, in consultation with the police commissioner, shall prepare and make available to operators of water- borne vessels, and operators of piers, marinas and boat repair yards educational materials related to the dangers of wakes to the safety of boaters in water-borne vessels in the water; the potentially adverse impact of wakes to piers and other shoreline structures, waterfront recreational facilities and parks, the shoreline itself, and wetlands along the city's waterfront; the importance of minimizing wakes as a water-borne vessel operates in a vessel regulation zone or no wake area; and which government entities have jurisdiction over rule-making and enforcement in the territorial waters of the city. § 10-159 Safe streets, safe city advisory board. (a) There is hereby established a safe streets, safe city advisory board. The safe streets, safe city advisory board shall consist of the deputy mayor for public safety, the police commissioner, one person appointed by the speaker of the city council, one additional person appointed by the mayor, one person appointed by the governor, one person appointed by the temporary president of the state senate, one person appointed by the minority leader of the senate, one person appointed by the speaker of the state assembly and one person appointed by the minority leader of the assembly. (b) The safe streets, safe city advisory board shall meet at least four times a year, including on the first Thursday in August, November, February and May. The advisory board may establish its own rules and procedures with respect to the conduct of its meetings and other affairs not inconsistent with law. (c) Membership on the safe streets, safe city advisory board shall not constitute the holding of a public office, and members of the advisory board shall not be required to take and file oaths of office before serving on the advisory board. (d) No member of the safe streets, safe city advisory board shall be disqualified from holding any public office or employment, nor shall a member forfeit any office or employment by reason of appointment as a member hereunder. (e) The director of the office of management and budget, in consultation with the police commissioner and heads of appropriate agencies of the city, shall make an annual report to the mayor within thirty days of the release of the preliminary budget in nineteen hundred ninety-two, nineteen hundred ninety- three, nineteen hundred ninety-four, nineteen hundred ninety-five, nineteen hundred ninety-six and nineteen hundred ninety-seven regarding implementation of the safe streets, safe city program. The mayor shall promptly forward a copy of such report to the safe streets, safe city advisory board, the governor, the temporary president of the state senate, the minority leader of the state senate, the speaker of the state assembly, the minority leader of the state assembly and the speaker of the city council. The director of the office of management and budget shall notify the safe streets, safe city advisory board of any proposed budget modification to the safe streets, safe city program at the same time such proposed budget modification is submitted to the city council for approval in the form of an updated supporting schedule to such proposed budget. Such notification shall contain a detailed description of the proposed modification and the impact thereof upon the safe streets, safe city program. (f) The safe streets, safe city advisory board shall report on August first, nineteen hundred ninety-one, and on October first of every year thereafter, through nineteen hundred ninety-six, on the implementation of the safe streets, safe city program within the city, with particular emphasis on the city's current efforts with respect to the city's criminal justice system, as well as the other agencies which are to receive enhanced funding under the safe streets, safe city program. Any additional written comments submitted by individual members of the advisory board regarding the city's implementation of the program shall be attached to and incorporated within the advisory board report as an addendum thereto. All comments and observations included in the report by the safe streets, safe city advisory board shall be responded to by the mayor. (g) The advisory board may request and shall receive from any department, division, board, bureau, commission, borough president, agency or public authority of the city of New York, such assistance, information, and data as will enable the advisory board properly to carry out its functions. § 10-160 Security measures at automated teller machine facilities. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section: (1) Access code means a series of numbers or letters, unique to each banking customer, which when entered into an automated teller machine, grant the customer entry to the customer's account records. (2) Automated teller machine means a device, linked to a financial institution's account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments. (3) Automated teller machine card means an instrument authorized by a bank which permits a customer to gain access to an automated teller machine facility. (4) Automated teller machine facility means the area comprised of one or more automated teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours. (5) Bank means any banking corporation, as defined in section 11-640 of the code, which operates, owns, or controls an automated teller machine facility in the city of New York. (6) Adequate lighting with respect to an open and operating automated teller machine facility located on an exterior wall of a building open to the outdoor air, and any defined parking area, means lighting during nighttime hours according to the following standards: (i) a minimum of ten candlefoot power at the face of the automated teller machine and extending in an unobstructed direction outward five feet; (ii) a minimum of two candlefoot power within fifty feet from all unobstructed directions from the face of the automated teller machine. If such machine is located within ten feet of the corner of the building and the automated teller machine facility is generally accessible from the adjacent side, there shall be a minimum of two candlefoot power along the first forty unobstructed feet of the adjacent side of the building. With respect to defined parking areas, adequate lighting means a minimum of two candlefoot power in that portion of the parking area within sixty feet of the automated teller machine facility. With respect to an automated teller machine facility located within the interior of a building, adequate lighting means lighting, on a twenty-four hour basis, which permits a person entering the facility to readily and easily see all persons occupying such facility, and which permits a person inside the facility to readily and easily see all persons at the entry door of such facility. (7) Defined parking area means that portion of any parking area open for bank customer parking which is (i) contiguous to any paved walkway or sidewalk within fifty feet of an automated teller machine facility, (ii) regularly, principally and lawfully used for parking by users of the automated teller machine facility while conducting transactions at such automated teller machine facility during nighttime hours; and (iii) owned or leased by the operator of the automated teller machine facility, or owned or otherwise controlled by the party leasing the automated teller machine facility site to the operator. The term does not include any parking area which is not open or regularly used for parking by the users of the automated teller machine who are conducting automated teller machine transactions during nighttime hours. A parking area is not open if it is physically closed to access or if conspicuous signs indicate that it is closed. (8) Nighttime hours means the period of time beginning at sunset and ending at sunrise. (9) Candlefoot power means the light intensity of candles on a horizontal plane at thirty-six inches above ground level and five feet in front of the area to be measured. (10) Regular banking hours means the period of time during each weekday, Monday through Friday, commencing at nine o'clock a.m. and ending at three o'clock p.m. b. Security measures. A bank shall maintain the following security measures with respect to each of its automated teller machine facilities: (1) a surveillance camera or cameras, which shall view and record all persons entering, exiting, and moving within or about an automated teller machine facility located within the interior of a building, or which shall view and record all activity occurring within a minimum of three feet in front of an automated teller machine located on an exterior wall of a building open to the outdoor air. Such camera or cameras need not view and record banking transactions made at the automated teller machine. The recordings made by such cameras shall be preserved by the bank for at least thirty days; (2) entry doors equipped with locking devices which permit entry to such facility only to persons using an automated teller machine card or access code issued by a bank for that purpose. Provided, however, that any automated teller machine facility located within the interior of a building that is not equipped with such entry door locking devices shall have at least one security guard stationed therein during the period of time after regular banking hours when such automated teller machine facility is available to banking customers; (3) entry doors equipped with fire exit bolts pursuant to paragraph two of subdivision k of section 27-371 of the code: (4) adequate lighting; (5) at least one exterior wall made substantially of untinted glass or other untinted, transparent material, which provides an unobstructed view of the automated teller machine or machines within the automated teller machine facility; (6) reflective mirrors or surfaces at each automated teller machine which provide the user a rear view; (7) a reflective mirror or mirrors placed in a manner which permits a person present in the automated teller machine facility to view areas within such facility which are otherwise concealed from plain view; and (8) a clearly visible sign, which at a minimum, states: (i) the activity within the automated teller machine facility is being recorded by surveillance camera; (ii) customers should close the entry door completely upon entering if the automated teller machine facility is located within the interior of a building; (iii) customers should not permit entrance to any unknown person at any time after regular banking hours when an automated teller machine facility located within the interior of a building is available to banking customers; (iv) customers should place withdrawn cash securely upon their person before exiting the automated teller machine facility; and (v) complaints concerning security in the automated teller machine facility should be directed to the bank's security department or to the department of consumer and worker protection, together with telephone numbers for such complaints. Where emergency assistance is needed due to criminal activity or medical emergency, call 911 at the nearest available public telephone. Paragraphs two, three, five and seven of this subdivision shall not apply to any automated teller machine facility located on an exterior wall of a building open to the outdoor air. Paragraph five of this subdivision shall not apply to any automated teller machine facility located in (i) a landmark building or within an historic district, if compliance with paragraph five would require the approval of the landmarks preservation commission, and such approval has been sought and denied; or (ii) any building, if compliance with paragraph five would require the removal of a load-bearing wall as defined in section 27-232 of the code. c. Reserved. d. List of facilities. Any bank which operates an automated teller machine facility shall file a list of such facilities with the police department, the department of consumer and worker protection, and the department of buildings, including the street addresses, intersecting streets, hours of operation, method of security, and method of surveillance at each facility, and the telephone number of the bank's security department. The police department shall distribute to each police precinct a list of all automated teller machine facilities in the precinct which are available to banking customers. e. Violations and penalties. (1) A bank found to be in violation of any provision of subdivision b of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than two hundred fifty dollars. Each violation of any provision of subdivision b of this section with respect to a particular automated teller machine facility shall be considered a separate violation thereof. (2) Any bank found to be in violation of any provision of subdivision b of this section shall correct the violation within three days after such finding. Failure to correct the violation within three days after such finding shall subject the bank to a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars or more than one thousand dollars and an additional civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars per day for each day such violation continues. (3) Any bank found to be in violation of subdivision h of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars for each automated teller machine facility for which a report has not been filed. Any bank which makes a material false statement or material omission in any report filed pursuant to subdivision h of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than five thousand dollars for each report. (4) A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized to be imposed pursuant to this section shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation which shall be returnable to any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings. Such commissioner, after due notice and an opportunity for a hearing, shall be authorized to impose the civil penalties prescribed by this section. f. Consumer safety information. Upon the original issuance or reissuance of an automated teller machine facility access card or code, or any other means or device permitting access to an automated teller machine facility, the issuing bank shall provide its customer with written information concerning safety precautions to be employed while using an automated teller machine facility. Such written information shall include at a minimum the information described in subparagraphs (i) through (v) of paragraph eight of subdivision b of this section. In addition, upon the effective date of the local law which added this section and for one year thereafter, such written information shall also include a statement indicating that notwithstanding efforts to restrict access to an automated teller machine facility located within the interior of a building to persons authorized to use an automated teller machine card or access code, entrance is sometimes obtained by persons who are not authorized to use the automated teller machine facility. g. Enforcement; statistics. (1) The police department, the department of consumer and work protection, and the department of buildings shall be authorized to enforce this section. (2) Statistics of crimes associated with the use of automated teller machines compiled and maintained by the police department shall be made available upon the request of any bank. (3) Notwithstanding the provisions of section six hundred sixty-six of the charter, a notice of violation issued by the department of buildings pursuant to this section shall not be subject to review by the board of standards and appeals. h. Certification of compliance. Within thirty days after the effective date of the local law which added this section, and each year thereafter, every bank which has an automated teller machine facility which is in operation on such date or on such date every year thereafter, shall submit a written report to the commissioner of buildings, on a form prescribed by such commissioner, certifying that such automated teller machine facility is in compliance with the provisions of this section, or if such facility is not in compliance with the provisions of this section, such report shall state the manner in which such facility fails to meet the requirements of this section and the reasons for such non-compliance. Each such report shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars for each automated teller machine facility operated by the bank. i. Compliance with building code and all other applicable provisions of law. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to exempt or relieve any bank from complying with all relevant provisions of the building code and all other applicable provisions of law. j. Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any unenclosed automated teller machine located in any building, structure or space whose primary purpose or function is unrelated to banking activities, including but not limited to supermarkets, airports and school buildings, provided that such automated teller machine shall be available for use only during the regular hours of operation of the building, structure or space in which such machine is located. § 10-161 Three-card Monte Prohibited. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, three-card monte shall mean a game or scheme in which the player is to receive money if he or she correctly selects one of any number of objects, which object was designated by the dealer, operator or any individual working with said dealer or operator of the game or scheme, as the winning object prior to shuffling or rearranging the position of such objects. Objects shall be defined as any item capable of being shuffled or rearranged on a surface, including, but not limited to, cards, shells or caps. b. It shall be unlawful for any person to deal or operate, or be in any manner accessory to the dealing or operating, of three-card monte on any public street, sidewalk or plaza. c. Any person who violates subdivision b of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. § 10-162 Interference with professional sporting event. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Major venue sporting event. An athletic competition or practice involving a professional team or an athletic competition or practice being conducted in a venue with a permanent seating capacity of more than five thousand. The duration of such competition or practice is to include the period from the opening of the venue's gates to the public, to the closing of the gates after the event. 2. Playing area. Any area designated for use by players, coaches, officials or other team or league personnel that is on, or adjacent to, the area of play during the period from the opening of the venue's gates to the public, to the closing of the gates after the event. 3. Sports participant. An umpire, referee, player, coach, manager, security employee, groundskeeper, stadium operations employee, or any other sanctioned participant in which the major venue sporting event is taking place. 4. Dangerous instrument. Any instrument, article or substance which, under the circumstances in which it is used, attempted to be used or threatened to be used, is readily capable of causing death or other serious physical injury. 5. Substance. The term includes, but is not limited, to any liquid or saliva. b. Conduct prohibited. 1. It shall be illegal for any person other than a sports participant to knowingly enter or remain unlawfully upon the playing area of a major venue sporting event. 2. It shall be illegal for any person other than a sports participant to subject a sports participant to contact by means of any substance, object or dangerous instrument during a major venue sporting event, or attempt to do so, with the intent to cause physical injury to a sports participant during a major venue sporting event or with the intent to disrupt a major venue sporting event. 3. It shall be illegal for any person other than a sports participant to place, drop, toss or hurl any substance, object or dangerous instrument onto the playing area of a major venue sporting event, or attempt to do so, with the intent to cause physical injury to a sports participant during a major venue sporting event or with the intent to disrupt a major venue sporting event. 4. It shall be illegal for any person other than a sports participant to strike, slap, kick or otherwise subject to physical contact a sports participant during a major venue sporting event, or to attempt to do so, with the intent to cause physical injury to a sports participant during a major venue sporting event or with the intent to disrupt a major venue sporting event. c. Criminal penalties. 1. Any person who knowingly enters or remains unlawfully upon the playing area of a major venue sporting event shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than one year, a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or both. 2. Any person who uses a dangerous instrument when violating the provisions of paragraph two of subdivision b of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than one year or a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or both. Any person who violates the provisions of such paragraph by using any substance or object other than a dangerous instrument shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than ninety days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 3. Any person who uses a dangerous instrument when violating the provisions of paragraph three of subdivision b of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than one year or a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or both. Any person who violates the provisions of such paragraph by using any substance or object other than a dangerous instrument shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than ninety days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. 4. Any person who violates the provisions of paragraph four of subdivision b of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than one year or a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or both. d. Civil penalties. 1. Any person who violates the provisions of paragraph one or paragraph three of subdivision b of this section shall be liable, to any person or entity injured or aggrieved by such action, for a civil penalty of not less than one thousand dollars and not more than five thousand dollars. 2. Any person who violates the provisions of paragraph two or paragraph four of subdivision b of this section shall be liable, to any person or entity injured or aggrieved by such action, for a civil penalty of not less than ten thousand dollars and not more than twenty-five thousand dollars. 3. The civil penalties set forth in paragraphs one and two of this subdivision shall be in addition to any criminal penalties and/or sanctions that may be imposed, and such civil penalties shall not limit or preclude any cause of action available to any person or entity injured or aggrieved by such action. § 10-163 Speed contests and races. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Vehicle shall have the same meaning as such term is defined in article one of the vehicle and traffic law. 2. Engage or aid or abet shall mean actions or circumstances that reasonably indicate that a race, exhibition or contest of speed or stunt behavior has occurred or is imminent, including, but not limited to: the presence of a canister appearing to hold nitrous oxide attached to a vehicle; an explicit invitation to race; the presence of a starting or ending point marked in some way; wagering on the race's outcome; the exhibiting of stunt behavior; acting as a starter or flagperson; pushing vehicles to a starting line; or directing traffic at such an event or gathering. 3. Stunt behavior shall mean operating a vehicle in a public place, or on private property open to the public, in a manner which unreasonably interferes with other persons' use of public streets and/or endangers the health or safety of the public, the vehicle operator or its passengers, by accelerating a vehicle at a high rate of speed; raising a vehicle to the degree that one or more wheels lose contact with the ground, commonly referred to as a wheelie; spinning a vehicle rapidly in a circle, commonly referred to as a donut; using the power of the engine and braking force to cause the rear wheel of a vehicle to spin, heating the rear tire and producing smoke; or increasing the revolutions per minute of a vehicle whether or not the vehicle is in motion, commonly referred to as revving, thereby causing unreasonable noise. b. Except as provided in the vehicle and traffic law, no person shall engage in any race, exhibition or contest of speed involving a vehicle, or aid or abet in such race, exhibition or contest of speed, on any highway, street, alley, sidewalk, or any public or private parking lot or area. c. Except as provided in the vehicle and traffic law, no person shall engage in stunt behavior involving a vehicle, or aid or abet in such stunt behavior. d. Except as provided in the vehicle and traffic law, no person shall participate in any event or gathering held for the purpose of a race, exhibition or contest of speed or stunt behavior involving a vehicle. For purposes of this subdivision, participate shall mean wagering on the outcome of the race, exhibition or contest of speed or stunt behavior or taking specific overt actions encouraging the people engaging in the race, exhibition, contest of speed or stunt behavior. e. Except as provided in the vehicle and traffic law, no person shall operate, drive or park a motorcycle, whether or not in motion, unless the number plate is easily readable and is not obstructed by any part of the motorcycle, its equipment, or anything carried thereon, including the operator or a passenger. For purposes of this subdivision, motorcycle shall have the same meaning as in section one hundred twenty three of the vehicle and traffic law. f. A violation of subdivision b or c shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable by imprisonment of not more than six months or a fine of not more than six hundred dollars, or both such fine and imprisonment, except that the imprisonment for a violation of subdivision c shall be not more than sixty days. A second or subsequent violation of subdivision b or c of this section committed within ten years of a violation of subdivision b or c of this section shall be punishable upon conviction by imprisonment of not more than one year or a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or both such fine and imprisonment, except that the imprisonment for a violation of subdivision c shall be not more than one hundred twenty days. A violation of subdivision d or e shall constitute a violation punishable by imprisonment of up to fifteen days or a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars, or both such fine and imprisonment. § 10-164 Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. a. Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, as defined in the vehicle and traffic law, equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred feet to the front of such vehicle other than a police vehicle or bicycle when operated as an authorized emergency vehicle, and when audible signals are sounded from any said vehicle by siren, exhaust whistle, bell, air-horn or electronic equivalent; the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway, or to either edge of a one-way roadway three or more lanes in width, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized employee of the police department. b. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and for a first conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than thirty days or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a conviction of a second violation, both of which were committed within a period of ten years, a person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than six hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than ninety days or by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a conviction of a third or subsequent violation, all of which were committed within a period of ten years, a person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than nine hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than one-hundred eighty days or by both such fine and imprisonment. § 10-165 Serial acts of public lewdness. A person is guilty of serial acts of public lewdness when two or more times within any three-year period he or she intentionally exposes the private or intimate parts of his or her body in a lewd manner or commits any other lewd act (a) in a public place, or (b) in private premises under circumstances in which he or she may readily be observed from either a public place or from other private premises, and with intent that he or she be so observed. A person who commits serial acts of public lewdness shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor. § 10-166 Use of cellular telephones by schoolchildren. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section: (1) Cellular telephone shall mean any mobile analog, wireless, digital or other similar telephone or communications device, which can be used to access two-way real time voice telecommunications service that is interconnected to a public switched telephone network and is provided by a commercial mobile radio service, as such term is defined by 47 CFR § 20.3. (2) School shall mean any buildings, grounds, facilities, property, or portion thereof under the jurisdiction of the New York city department of education or any non-public school that provides educational instruction to students at or below the twelfth grade level. (3) Student shall mean any person under the age of eighteen enrolled in a school. b. Any parent or guardian of any student may provide such student with a cellular telephone for any lawful use en route to and from school. No person shall interfere with the provision of such telephone to, or the use of such telephone by, such student. c. Any person who is aggrieved by interference prohibited by subdivision b of this section shall be entitled to seek equitable relief in any court of competent jurisdiction. d. Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect or limit the right of any school or law enforcement official to enforce regulations regarding the use of cellular telephones. § 10-167 Climbing, jumping or suspending of oneself from structures prohibited. a. For purposes of this section, the term structure shall mean any building, monument, statue, crane, bridge, sign, tower or other object, or any combination thereof, exceeding fifty feet in height. b. It shall be unlawful to: (i) jump or attempt to jump from a structure, or (ii) climb or attempt to climb up, down or around the exterior of a structure, or suspend or attempt to suspend oneself from the exterior of a structure or on a device attached to one or more structures, unless permission has been granted to climb or suspend oneself from the structure by the owner of the structure for the sole purpose of performing construction or maintenance. c. This section shall not apply to a structure the primary purpose of which is recreational or instructional climbing or jumping, provided that permission is granted for such activity by the owner of such structure. d. Any person who violates the provisions of subdivision b of this section shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor, punishable by up to one year in jail or a fine of up to one thousand dollars or both. § 10-168 Prohibition of use of non-wood bats. a. Definitions. When used herein, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Competitive baseball game shall mean any organized baseball game at which a certified umpire officiates and which takes place in the city of New York. 2. High school age children shall mean persons older than thirteen years of age, but younger than eighteen years of age. 3. School shall mean any public or private school which includes any grade nine through twelve and which is located in the city of New York. 4. Wood bat shall mean any baseball bat constructed exclusively of wood or any wood laminated or wood composite bat, which is approved by major league baseball, pursuant to such organization's official rules, for major league or minor league baseball play; provided that such term shall not include any bat made in whole or in part of metal, including, but not limited to, aluminum, magnesium, scandium, titanium or any other alloy compound. b. Only wood bats shall be used in any competitive baseball game in which high school age children are participants and which involves the participation and/or sponsorship of a school. § 10-169 Regulation of publicly accessible collection bins. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section: Commissioner shall mean the commissioner of sanitation. Department shall mean the department of sanitation. Publicly accessible collection bin shall mean any outdoor container, other than any container placed by any government or governmental agency, or its contractors or licensees, that allows for any member of the public to deposit items into the container for the purpose of collection by the owner of such container. b. Requirements. All publicly accessible collection bins shall comply with the following provisions: 1. Each individual publicly accessible collection bin shall prominently display on the front and on at least one other side of the bin, the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the bin. This information shall be printed in characters that are plainly visible. In no event shall a post office box be considered an acceptable address for purposes of this paragraph. 2. No publicly accessible collection bin may be placed on any city property, or property maintained by the city, or on any public sidewalk or roadway. 3. No publicly accessible collection bin shall be placed on any private property without the written permission of the property owner or the property owner's designated agent. 4. The owner of a publicly accessible collection bin placed on private property with the written permission of the property owner, or the property owner's designated agent, and the owner of the property where the bin is located shall be responsible for maintaining such bin in a clean and neat condition. 5. All owners of publicly accessible collection bins that are placed on private property with the written permission of the property owner, or the property owner's designated agent, shall be required to register with the department. Such registration, at a minimum, shall include the location of the publicly accessible collection bin, the type of material collected in the bin, and the name, address, and telephone number of the owner. On or before August first, two thousand fifteen, and annually thereafter, each such owner shall submit a report to the commissioner identifying the weight of the material collected during the period beginning on July first of the year preceding the year the report is due and ending on June thirtieth of the year the report is due. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any publicly accessible collection bin to submit a report containing false or misleading information or to fail to submit a report in accordance with this paragraph. 6. In addition to penalties provided for in any other provisions of law, in the event that a publicly accessible collection bin is placed on any city property, or property maintained by the city, or on any public sidewalk or roadway, the department shall have the authority to remove such bin. Any publicly accessible collection bin placed on any city property, or property maintained by the city, or on any public sidewalk or roadway, shall be presumed to have been placed there intentionally. If the name and address of the owner of such publicly accessible collection bin are located on the bin and are legible, such owner shall be notified by the department by certified mail, return receipt requested, that such publicly accessible collection bin was removed by the department and that the owner can claim such bin through the procedure established by rule. If the name and address of the owner of such publicly accessible collection bin are not located on the bin or are not legible, the commissioner may dispose of such bin in accordance with applicable law and rules thirty days after removal. Any owner who seeks to claim a publicly accessible collection bin that has been removed by the department shall pay the penalty established by this section and the costs of removal and storage, unless, after adjudication by the environmental control board, the owner is found not liable for violating this section, in which case such bin shall be released forthwith, and no removal or storage costs shall be imposed as a condition of such release. If any publicly accessible collection bin is not claimed within thirty days of the mailing of notice to the owner, the commissioner may dispose of such bin in accordance with applicable law and rules. c. Any person who violates the provisions of paragraph two of subdivision b of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty recoverable in a proceeding before the environmental control board of one hundred dollars for the first offense and three hundred fifty dollars for each subsequent offense within any eighteen-month period. Any person who violates the provisions of paragraph two of subdivision b of this section or any rules promulgated pursuant thereto by attaching or enclosing by any means any publicly accessible collection bin to or on any city property, or property maintained by the city, or on any public sidewalk or roadway, shall be liable for a civil penalty recoverable in a proceeding before the environmental control board of three hundred fifty dollars for the first offense and eight hundred fifty dollars for each subsequent offense within any eighteen-month period. For purposes of this section, each publicly accessible collection bin placed on any city property, or property maintained by the city, or on any public sidewalk or roadway, shall be deemed a separate violation. d. Any person who violates the provisions of paragraphs one, four or five of subdivision b of this section or any rules promulgated pursuant thereto shall be liable for a civil penalty recoverable in a proceeding before the environmental control board of fifty dollars for the first offense and one hundred dollars for each subsequent offense within any eighteen-month period. e. The commissioner may promulgate such rules as are necessary to implement the provisions of this section including, but not limited to, rules relating to: 1. payment, by the owner, of removal and storage costs incurred by the commissioner, 2. registration and reporting requirements for publicly accessible collection bins placed on private property, 3. the procedures for claiming publicly accessible collection bins that are removed by the department, and 4. the disposal of publicly accessible collection bins that have been removed by the department and claimed by an owner in cases where there is a subsequent failure to collect such bins. § 10-170 Criminal street gang initiation activity. a. A person is guilty of criminal street gang initiation activity when, in the course of his or her own or another person's initiation or affiliation into a criminal street gang, he or she: 1. intentionally or recklessly engages in conduct that creates a substantial risk of physical injury to another person; or 2. by physical menace, intentionally places or attempts to place another person in fear of death, imminent serious physical injury or physical injury. b. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Criminal conduct shall mean the felonies or misdemeanors defined in any of the following articles of the penal law: one hundred twenty, relating to assault and related offenses; one hundred twenty-five, relating to homicide; one hundred thirty, relating to sex offenses; one hundred thirty-five, relating to kidnapping, coercion and related offenses; one hundred forty, relating to burglary and related offenses; one hundred forty-five, relating to criminal mischief and related offenses; one hundred fifty, relating to arson; one hundred fifty-five, relating to larceny; one hundred sixty, relating to robbery; one hundred sixty-five, relating to theft; two hundred fifteen, relating to judicial proceedings; two hundred twenty, relating to controlled substances offenses; two hundred twenty-one, relating to offenses involving marihuana; two hundred twenty-five, relating to gambling offenses; two hundred thirty, relating to prostitution offenses or two hundred sixty-five, relating to firearms and other dangerous weapons; or harassment in the first degree or aggravated harassment in the first or second degree, as defined in article two hundred forty of the penal law. 2. Criminal street gang shall mean any ongoing organization, association, or group of three or more persons, whether formal or informal, that engages in criminal conduct as one of its primary purposes or activities. c. Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor. § 10-171 Prohibited acts during a local state of emergency. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Essential goods or services shall mean those goods or services provided by utilities, government or private entities or personnel that are necessary to sustain or safeguard a person or property and without which a person or property is vulnerable to harm or damage. Such term shall include, but not be limited to, electricity, heat or gas service; mass transportation; telecommunications; fire-fighting, police, armed-forces, emergency medical, or hospital service; the availability of sufficient and appropriate food and clothing; temperate, sanitary, and safe shelter; potable water; and fuel. 2. Local state of emergency shall mean the period of time during which a proclamation issued by the mayor, declaring a local state of emergency pursuant to executive law section twenty-four, is in effect. 3. Mandatory evacuation period shall mean the period of time during which the occupancy and use of buildings and homes is prohibited for public safety purposes in response to a natural or man-made disaster, as determined by the mayor pursuant to section twenty-four of the executive law, and as declared by the mayor in an executive order during the pendency of a local state of emergency. 4. Mandatory evacuation zone shall mean any area where the occupancy and use of buildings and dwellings is prohibited for public safety purposes in response to a natural or man-made disaster as determined by the mayor pursuant to section twenty-four of the executive law, and as declared by the mayor in an executive order during the pendency of a local state of emergency. b. Prohibited acts. During a local state of emergency, in a mandatory evacuation zone for the duration of a mandatory evacuation period, or when the conduct described below occurs during the reduction or loss of essential goods or services as a result of such emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to: (1) intentionally or recklessly cause, or create a material risk of, physical injury to a person; (2) intentionally or recklessly damage, create material risk of damage to, or wrongfully deprive another person of property; (3) knowingly enter or remain unlawfully in a building or upon real property of another person; (4) intentionally or recklessly impede, or cause a material risk of impeding, response to the circumstances of the emergency by any governmental agency, officer or employee; or (5) impersonate another with the intent to obtain a benefit, or to injure or defraud a person; provided, however, that such conduct shall also constitute a violation of this section if it occurs after the period of a local state of emergency where such conduct is related to circumstances surrounding or arising out of the emergency. c. Affirmative defense. In any prosecution under this section, it is an affirmative defense that the defendant's conduct constituted reasonable action taken as a result of or in response to the emergency. d. Penalties. Any person who violates subdivision b of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than six months and a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars, or a civil penalty of not less than one thousand dollars and not more than five thousand dollars, or both; provided, however, that if the person harmed or the real or personal property affected is located in a mandatory evacuation zone and such violation occurs during a mandatory evacuation period, then the perpetrator of such act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than one year and a fine of not more than five thousand dollars, or a civil penalty of not less than five thousand dollars and not more than ten thousand dollars, or both. e. Each violation of subdivision b of this section shall be deemed a separate offense for which a separate criminal fine or civil penalty may be imposed. Penalties imposed pursuant to this section shall not be deemed to limit or preclude any remedy, penalty, or cause of action available under any other law. f. It shall not constitute a defense to an enforcement action taken pursuant to this section that the real or personal property entered, damaged, or taken has been previously damaged under the circumstances of or in connection with the events associated with the declaration of a local state of emergency. § 10-172 Security guards in nonpublic schools. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: Administering agency means one or more agencies designated by the mayor to administer the program or components thereof established by this section. The department of education, with its concurrence, may be designated as an administering agency. The city and such department may enter into an agreement in furtherance of the implementation of this section. Allowable costs means (i) security guard wages equal to the prevailing wage and supplements, subject to provisions of this section governing the reimbursement of such costs, and (ii) reasonable costs, as established by rules promulgated by the administering agency, paid by qualifying nonpublic schools to security guard companies. Allowable costs shall include the cost of training that may be required pursuant to this section, but only to the extent that such training is not otherwise required by article 7-A of the general business law or any other federal, state, or local law or regulation, and shall not include any costs for overtime that are greater than fifteen percent of the non-overtime security wages reimbursed to a qualifying nonpublic school. City means the city of New York. Prevailing wage and supplements means the rate of wage and supplemental benefits per hour paid in the city to unarmed security guards as determined by the comptroller in accordance with section 234 of the labor law. Qualifying nonpublic school means any nonprofit elementary or secondary school in the city, other than a public school, which is providing instruction in accordance with the education law, has been assigned a Basic Educational Data System (BEDS) code by the New York state department of education, or a similar successor identifier, and is serving students in any combination of grades pre-kindergarten through twelve. Qualified provider list means a list of security guard companies that meet standards established by the administering agency to provide security services to nonpublic schools, which may include, but shall not be limited to, performance, training and other qualification standards. Security guard means an unarmed individual with a current and valid registration card issued in accordance with article 7-A of the general business law, authorizing such individual to perform security services in New York. Security guard company means a company licensed to provide security guards under contract to other entities pursuant to article 7 of the general business law. Security services means the unarmed protection of individuals and/or property from harm or other unlawful activity, as well as, prevention, deterrence, observation, detection and/or reporting to government agencies of unlawful activity or conditions that present a risk to the safety of students, staff or the public. b. Nonpublic school security guard reimbursement program. The mayor may authorize a program to reimburse qualifying nonpublic schools for the cost of security services as set forth in this section upon determining that such program would enhance public safety, in which case the remaining provisions of this section shall be applicable. c. The mayor shall designate an administering agency to administer the program. d. The administering agency shall establish a qualified provider list. Such list may be developed based upon standards to be promulgated by rule, or may be developed through a procurement to be conducted by such agency. e. Upon request of a qualifying nonpublic school, the administering agency shall reimburse such qualifying nonpublic school for the allowable costs of a security guard to provide security services at such school at all times that such school is open for school-related instruction or school-related events, including, but not limited to, school-related after school programs and athletic events. f. Except as set forth in subdivision g of this section, the administering agency shall provide reimbursement of the allowable costs for: 1. one security guard at a qualifying nonpublic school that enrolls from 300 to 499 students; 2. two security guards at a qualifying nonpublic school that enrolls at least 500 students; and 3. an additional security guard at a qualifying nonpublic school for each additional 500 students enrolled. For purposes of this subdivision, students with respect to whom the city separately provides assistance that includes funding for security shall not be included in the reimbursement determination, and reimbursement for the services of one security guard during periods of school-related instruction or school- related events may include the costs of different individuals providing security services at different times. Further, the term student shall be deemed to refer to the full-time equivalent thereof, based upon a six hour and twenty-minute school day for a student. g. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions e and f, a qualifying nonpublic school shall not be eligible to receive reimbursement from the administering agency unless: 1. such request is made in a form and manner prescribed by the administering agency; 2. each such security guard is employed by a security guard company on the qualified provider list, provided that if such list has not been established by the administering agency or the list contains fewer than three security guard companies, then each such security guard must be employed by a security guard company; 3. each such security guard is paid no less than the prevailing wage and supplements; 4. each such security guard provides security services and no other services; 5. each such security guard and security guard company has been employed or retained in compliance with applicable labor and employment laws; 6. the nonpublic school, acting in coordination with the security guard or security guard company, reports criminal and other significant public safety-related incidents to the police department or other appropriate government agency promptly after such incidents occur and in annual summary reports, in accordance with rules promulgated by the administering agency; and 7. the nonpublic school complies with rules promulgated by the administering agency. h. The administering agency shall provide reimbursement of allowable costs on a quarterly basis after receiving satisfactory proof from the qualified nonpublic school of compliance with the requirements for reimbursement set forth in this section. i. The reimbursement authorized by this section shall not interfere with any rights a security guard has pursuant to any collective bargaining agreement. j. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this local law, the total annual amount of reimbursements authorized by this section shall be a maximum of $19,800,000 dollars per school year, which shall be adjusted annually by the administering agency, if such agency anticipates that such maximum will be reached in the subsequent one-year period, to reflect changes in the prevailing wage and supplements, the number of students attending qualifying nonpublic schools, or the number of qualifying nonpublic schools, provided that such reimbursements shall in no event exceed the amounts appropriated for implementation of this section. To the extent the administering agency anticipates that the amount requested for reimbursement will exceed the funds available, the administering agency shall reimburse for allowable costs on an equitable basis until such funds are exhausted. k. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a qualifying nonpublic school from paying a wage to a security guard greater than that for which it receives reimbursement pursuant to this section. l. The provision of reimbursement to a qualifying nonpublic school for allowable costs of a security guard pursuant to this section shall not make the city of New York or any administering agency the employer of such security guard, and such school shall be solely responsible for withholding and payment of any taxes and other government required payments. Further, nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve any qualifying nonpublic school of responsibility for all other elements of security that may be required or appropriate and are not funded pursuant to this section. m. The administering agency may promulgate any rules as may be necessary for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this section, including, but not limited to, rules (i) relating to the training of security guards, (ii) ensuring that security guards and security guard companies are appropriately qualified to provide security services to qualifying nonpublic schools, and (iii) providing for prompt reporting of criminal and other significant public safety-related incidents to the police department or other appropriate government agency as well as annual summary reports of such incidents. § 10-173 Uniform civil penalties for possessing an open container of alcohol. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, the civil penalty for the violation of 56 RCNY  1-05(f)(1), or any successor rule of the department of parks and recreation that prohibits or restricts the consumption or possession with intent to consume an open container of alcohol, shall be no greater than the civil penalties established by section 10-125 of the code. § 10-174 Next generation 911. a. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Commissioner. The term commissioner means the commissioner of information technology and telecommunications. Next Generation 911. The term next generation 911 means an internet protocol based system that allows digital information, including voice, photos, videos, and text messages, to be transmitted from the public to emergency responders in accordance with any national 911 program standards or guidelines applicable pursuant to federal or state law. b. By no later than six months after the end of each fiscal year, the commissioner, in consultation with the police commissioner and fire commissioner, shall issue to the mayor and the council, and make publicly available online, a report on the implementation of next generation 911 within the 911 emergency assistance system. Such report shall contain (i) a description of the current implementation plan, including planned next steps, (ii) a description of steps taken towards implementation since the prior report, (iii) a description of the feasibility of implementing a 911 text message transmission capability before full implementation of next generation 911 and (iv) any other information the commissioner deems relevant. c. Upon determining that next generation 911 has been fully implemented or that no further implementation will occur, the commissioner shall issue to the mayor and the council, and make publicly available online, a final report under subdivision b of this section and no further reports shall be required. Such final report shall include a conspicuous statement that it is a final report pursuant to this subdivision. § 10-174.1 Identification of city employees. a. Definitions. As used in this section: Covered employee. The term “covered employee” means an employee of the city who is authorized to issue a notice of violation on behalf of the city, other than an employee of the police department, a firefighter, or a fire marshal. Business card. The term “business card” means a pre-printed or handwritten paper containing a covered employee’s identifying information. Electronic business card. The term “electronic business card” means a digital file or link to a website containing a covered employee’s identifying information. Identifying information. The term “identifying information” means a covered employee’s name and agency, and a telephone number and e-mail address that can be used to communicate with the agency. Notice of violation. The term “notice of violation” shall have the same meaning as the definition contained in section 1-112 of this code. b. Whenever a covered employee, acting in their official capacity, questions a natural person, such covered employee shall respond to a request for identifying information from such person with any of the following forms of identification: 1. A business card; 2. An electronic business card; or 3. Verbal provision of identifying information to such natural person, allowing such person sufficient time to record such information; provided that this form is utilized only when such covered employee is unable to provide such information in any of the other forms authorized by this subdivision or such person is unable to access an electronic business card. c. Any business card or electronic business card used by a covered employee to comply with this section shall, in addition to identifying information, include a phone number and digital contact information, if applicable, for the agency to receive comments or the 311 customer service center and an indication that such phone number and contact information may be used to submit comments about the encounter between such covered employee and such person. d. Each agency that employs covered employees shall ensure that covered employees have adequate information and support necessary to comply with subdivision b of this section. e. A covered employee shall not be required to comply with subdivision b of this section where: 1. Such covered employee is engaged in an agency-approved undercover activity or operation; 2. Exigent circumstances require immediate action by such employee; or 3. Such identifying information has been made available to the natural person who requested such information through a certificate of inspection, notice of violation, formal warning, request for corrective action, or similar communication. f. Nothing in this section or in the implementation thereof shall be construed to: 1. Restrict or limit any activity or proceeding regulated by the criminal procedure law or any other state law; or 2. Create a private right of action on the part of any persons or entity against the city of New York, any agency or any official or employee thereof. § 10-175 Neighborhood support teams. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: Coordinating agency. The term coordinating agency means the agency designated by the mayor to coordinate and oversee implementation of the requirements of this section. Geographic area. The term geographic area means an area no larger than a community district. Quality of life condition. The term quality of life condition means a condition that has an adverse effect on the quality of life for residents and visitors in a geographic area, including but not limited to a condition involving sanitation, transportation, social services, public health, or public safety, as determined by the coordinating agency. b. Commencing September 1, 2016, and on or before September 1 annually thereafter, the coordinating agency shall review requests from council members, community boards, business improvement districts, and any other sources as determined by the coordinating agency, and develop a priority list of no less than three geographic areas that the coordinating agency deems would benefit from inter-agency collaboration to address and improve quality of life conditions in such areas. The coordinating agency shall create and execute plans in coordination with the appropriate agencies to address the quality of life conditions in such geographic areas, which shall include but not be limited to visits to such areas and community meetings, provided that such plans in no way restrict any power or authority granted by law to a city agency or officer or employee of any city agency. On March 1, 2017, and annually thereafter, the coordinating agency shall report to the council and make publicly available online a written description of the implementation of such plans. § 10-176 Direct telephone access to emergency services. a. As used in this section: Administering agency. The term administering agency means the offices or agencies designated by the mayor, pursuant to subdivision g of this section, to administer and enforce the provisions of this section. Covered business. The term covered business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation or other form of business organization which opens its facilities to the general public for the sale and purchase of goods or services. Multi-line telephone system. The term multi-line telephone system means a system accessible to the general public comprised of common control units, telephone sets, control hardware and software and adjunct systems which enables users to make and receive telephone calls using shared resources such as telephone network trunks or data link bandwidth. The term multi-line telephone system includes, but is not limited to, (i) network-based and premises-based systems, such as centrex services, (ii) premises-based, hosted and cloud-based voice over internet protocols, (iii) private branch exchanges, (iv) key telephone systems, and (v) hybrid key telephone systems. b. Each multi-line telephone system installed for operation by a covered business or the city on or after the effective date of the local law that added this section shall be configured to allow a person initiating a 911 call on such system to directly access 911 service by dialing the digits 911 without any additional code, digit, prefix, postfix or trunk-access code. c. By May 1, 2019, each existing multi-line telephone system operated by a covered business or the city shall be configured to allow a person initiating a 911 call on such system to directly access 911 service by dialing the digits 911 without any additional code, digit, prefix, postfix or trunk-access code. d. Each (i) multi-line telephone system installed for operation by a covered business or the city on or after the effective date of the local law that added this section, and (ii) by May 1, 2019, each existing multi-line telephone system operated by a covered business or the city shall be configured to provide, to a centralized location on such system, notification of any 911 call made on such system. e. Prior to configuration or in the course of investigation under subdivision f of this section, a covered business or the city may schedule and conduct a test call for their multi-line telephone system to ensure such system can directly access 911 service by dialing the digits 911 without any additional code, digit, prefix, postfix or trunk-access code. Any such test call must be scheduled with and conducted in conjunction with the police department. f. 1. Upon receipt of a complaint alleging that a covered business has failed to comply with this section or rules promulgated thereunder, the administering agency shall investigate such allegation. 2. Upon substantiating such allegation, such agency shall issue a notice of violation, in a form and manner established by such agency, to such covered business. In addition to any other information prescribed by such agency, such notice shall state that, if within 30 days after issuance of such notice, the condition giving rise to such violation is corrected and such covered business files with such agency, in a form and manner established by such agency, a certification that such condition has been corrected, then such covered business shall not be subject to a civil penalty for such violation. 3. If such covered business fails to correct such condition within 30 days after issuance of such notice or fails to file with the administering agency a certification in accordance with paragraph 2 of this subdivision, such covered business shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $250 for the first violation and not less than $500 for each subsequent violation, provided that: (a) Such covered business shall not be subject to a civil penalty for such violation if (i) such covered business establishes that the requirements of such subdivision would be unduly and unreasonably costly for such covered business to comply with and (ii) such covered business identifies the manufacturer and model number of the multi-line telephone system that needs to be reprogrammed or replaced and establishes that such covered business made a good faith attempt to reprogram or replace the system; and (b) No covered business shall be subject to more than one violation for the same multi-line telephone system in any 10-day period. 4. The administering agency may recover such penalties in an action in any court of appropriate jurisdiction or in a proceeding before an authorized tribunal of the office of administrative trials and hearings. g. The mayor shall, in writing, designate one or more offices or agencies to administer and enforce the provisions of this section and may, from time to time at the mayor's discretion, change such designation. Within 10 days after such designation or change thereof, a copy of such designation or change thereof shall be published on the city's website and on the website of each such office or agency, and shall be electronically submitted to the speaker of the council. § 10-177 Security measures at certain eating or drinking establishments. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Security guard. The term security guard means a person as defined by subdivision 6 of section 89-f of the general business law. Security guard company. The term security guard company means a company licensed to provide security guards under contract to other entities pursuant to article 7 of the general business law. b. Digital video surveillance cameras. a. The owner of an eating or drinking establishment that (i) operates pursuant to a permitted use under use group 12, section 32-21 of the zoning resolution, as indicated in such establishment's certificate of occupancy or place of assembly certificate of operation; and (ii) is required to have a license to sell liquor at retail pursuant to the alcohol beverage control law, shall equip all entrances and exits used by patrons with digital video surveillance cameras that comply with the following provisions: 1. The video surveillance cameras shall be digital in nature and shall be of sufficient number, type, placement and location to view and record all activity in front of and within 15 feet of either side of each entrance or exit; 2. The video surveillance cameras shall be sufficiently light sensitive and provide sufficient image resolution (supported by additional lighting if necessary) to produce easily discernible images recorded at all times; 3. The video surveillance cameras shall record at a minimum speed of fifteen frames per second; 4. The video surveillance camera images shall be capable of being viewed through use of appropriate technology, including but not limited to a computer screen or closed circuit television monitor; 5. The video surveillance camera or the system affiliated with such camera shall be capable of transferring the recorded images to a portable form of media, including but not limited to compact disc, digital video disc, universal serial bus, secure digital card or portable hard drive; 6. The video surveillance cameras shall not have an audio capability; 7. The video surveillance cameras shall be maintained in good working condition; 8. The video surveillance cameras shall be in operation and recording continuously during all hours of operation and for two hours after such establishment closes; 9. The recordings made by video surveillance cameras installed and maintained pursuant to this section shall be indexed by dates and times and preserved for a minimum of 30 days so that they may be made available to the police department and other government agencies acting in furtherance of a criminal investigation or a civil or administrative law enforcement purpose; 10. All recordings made by video surveillance cameras installed and maintained pursuant to this section while in the possession of such establishment shall be stored in a locked receptacle located in a controlled access area or, if such video recordings are in digital format, in a password- protected digital storage, to which only authorized personnel have access, or shall otherwise be secured so that only authorized personnel may access such video recordings. All personnel authorized to access such video recordings must certify in writing that they have been informed on the appropriate use and retention of recordings as set forth in this section, and on the legal issues associated with video surveillance and the use and retention of recordings. Such establishment shall keep a log of all instances of requests for, access to, dissemination and use of, recorded materials made by video surveillance cameras installed and maintained pursuant to this section; and 11. Signage shall be posted to notify the public of the use of video surveillance equipment so that the public has sufficient warning that surveillance is in operation. c. Security guards. 1. An eating or drinking establishment that (i) operates pursuant to a permitted use under use group 12, section 32-21 of the zoning resolution, as indicated in such establishment's certificate of occupancy or place of assembly certificate of operation; (ii) is required to have a license to sell liquor at retail pursuant to the alcohol beverage control law; and (iii) employs or retains the services of one or more security guards or a security guard company, shall maintain and make available during all hours of operation, proof that each such security guard is registered pursuant to article 7-A of the general business law or that such security guard company is licensed pursuant to article 7 of the general business law. 2. Such establishment shall maintain a roster of all security guards working at any given time when such establishment is open to the public, and shall require each security guard to maintain on his or her person proof of registration at all times when on the premises. 3. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a person employed or whose services are retained at such establishment whose job functions include (i) the monitoring or guarding of the entrance or exit of such nightclub to manage ingress and egress to such establishment for security purposes during the hours of operation of such establishment and/or (ii) protection of such establishment from disorderly or other unlawful conduct by such patrons is a security guard, provided, however, that such rebuttable presumption shall not apply to the owner of such establishment. 4. Any violation of this subdivision may be reported to the state liquor authority. d. Exemptions. This section does not apply to: 1. Premises owned, occupied and used exclusively by a membership corporation, club, society or association, provided such membership corporation, club, society or association was in actual existence prior to January 1, 1926. 2. Premises owned, occupied and used exclusively by a religious, charitable, eleemosynary or educational corporation or institution. 3. Premises licensed pursuant to subchapters one and three of chapter two of title 20. e. An eating or drinking establishment that is required to comply with subdivisions b and c of this section shall make available to the police department, upon request, such establishment's certificate of occupancy or place of assembly certificate of operation. f. Penalties. Any violation of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for each such violation, except that the use or dissemination of recordings made by video surveillance cameras installed and maintained pursuant to subdivision b of this section in violation of the penal law or section 50 of the civil rights law shall result in a civil penalty of not less than $5,000 nor more than $50,000. § 10-178 Immigration enforcement. a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: City property. The term city property means any real property leased or owned by the city that serves a city governmental purpose and over which the city has operational control. Immigration enforcement. The term immigration enforcement means the enforcement of any civil provision of the immigration and nationality act and any provision of such law that penalizes a person's presence in, entry into, or reentry into the United States. b. No agency shall subject its officers or employees to the direction and supervision of the secretary of homeland security primarily in furtherance of immigration enforcement. c. No city resources, including, but not limited to, time spent by employees, officers, contractors, or subcontractors while on duty, or the use of city property, shall be utilized for immigration enforcement. d. Whenever any city officer or employee receives a request from a non- local law enforcement agency for the city to provide support or assistance intended to further immigration enforcement, such officer or employee's agency shall make a record relating to such request, including any response or actions taken in response. An office of the mayor, or an agency the head of which is appointed by the mayor, shall be designated by the mayor to submit to the speaker of the council a quarterly report containing an anonymized compilation or summary of such requests and actions taken in response, disaggregated by the requesting non-local law enforcement agency and the agency receiving such a request; provided, however, disclosure of any such information shall not be required if: (i) such disclosure would interfere with law enforcement investigations or (ii) such disclosure is related to actions taken pursuant to clause (i) of subdivision e of this section and would compromise public safety. Such report shall not be required to include information contained in reports required pursuant to section 9-131, 9-205, or 14-154. e. Nothing in this section shall prohibit city officers and employees from performing their duties in accordance with state and local law by, including, but not limited to: (i) participating in cooperative arrangements with city, state, or federal law enforcement agencies that are not primarily intended to further immigration enforcement or utilizing city resources in connection with such cooperative arrangements and (ii) taking actions consistent with sections 9-205, 9-131, and 14-154. In addition, nothing in this section shall prevent any city officer or employee from complying with federal law or restrict their discretion to take any action if such restriction is prohibited by federal law. § 10-179 Disorderly behavior. a. Prohibition. A person is guilty of disorderly behavior when, with intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly or with criminal negligence creating a risk thereof, such person: 1. Engages in fighting or in violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior; 2. Makes unreasonable noise; 3. In a public place, uses abusive or obscene language, or makes an obscene gesture; 4. Without lawful authority, disturbs any lawful assembly or meeting of persons; 5. Obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 6. Congregates with other persons in a public place and refuses to comply with a lawful order of the police to disperse; or 7. Creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act which serves no legitimate purpose. b. Criminal penalty. The violation of subdivision a of this section constitutes an offense punishable by imprisonment of up to 5 days or a fine of up to 200 dollars. c. Civil penalty. Any person who violates subdivision a of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of up to 75 dollars, which may be recoverable in a proceeding before the office of administrative trials and hearings, pursuant to chapter 45-A of the charter. § 10-180 Unlawful disclosure of an intimate image. a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Consent. The term consent means permission that is knowingly, intelligently and voluntarily given for the particular disclosure at issue. Covered recipient. The term covered recipient means an individual who gains possession of, or access to, an intimate image from a depicted individual, including through the recording of the intimate image. Depicted individual. The term depicted individual means an individual depicted in a photograph, film, videotape, recording or any other reproduction of an image that portrays such individual (i) with fully or partially exposed intimate body parts, (ii) with another individual whose intimate body parts are exposed, as recorded immediately before or after the occurrence of sexual activity between those individuals, or (iii) engaged in sexual activity. Disclose. The term disclose means to disseminate as defined in subdivision 5 of section 250.40 of the penal law, or to publish as defined in subdivision 6 of section 250.40 of the penal law. Intimate body parts. The term intimate body parts means the genitals, pubic area or anus of any person, or the female nipple or areola of a person who is 11 years old or older. Intimate image. The term intimate image means a photograph, film, videotape, recording or any other reproduction of an image of a depicted individual that has been disclosed or threatened to be disclosed in a manner in which, or to a person or audience to whom, the depicted individual intended it would not be disclosed, at the time at which the covered recipient gained possession of, or access to, the intimate image. An intimate image does not include any image taken in a public place as defined in section 240.00 of the penal law, except if, at the time the image was recorded, an individual in the depicted individual's position would reasonably have believed that no one other than the covered recipient could view the applicable intimate body parts or sexual activity while such body parts were exposed or such activity was occurring. Sexual activity. The term sexual activity means sexual intercourse as defined in subdivision 1 of section 130.00 of the penal law, oral sexual conduct or anal sexual conduct as those terms are defined in subdivision 2 of section 130.00 of the penal law, touching of the sexual or other intimate parts of a person for the purpose of gratifying sexual desire, sexual penetration with any object or the transmission or appearance of semen upon any part of the depicted individual's body. b. Unlawful disclosure of an intimate image. 1. It is unlawful for a covered recipient to disclose an intimate image, without the depicted individual's consent, with the intent to cause economic, physical or substantial emotional harm to such depicted individual, where such depicted individual is or would be identifiable to another individual either from the intimate image or from the circumstances under which such image is disclosed. 2. It is unlawful for a covered recipient to make a threat to violate paragraph 1 of this subdivision, provided that for the purposes of this paragraph a depicted individual shall be considered to be identifiable where the covered recipient states or implies that such person would be so identifiable. c. Criminal penalty. Any individual who violates subdivision b of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by up to one year in jail, or a fine of up to $1,000, or both. d. Civil cause of action. 1. Any individual who suffers harm from a violation of subdivision b of this section shall have a civil cause of action in any court of competent jurisdiction against the individual who violated that subdivision. 2. The defendant may be held liable to the plaintiff for any or all of the following relief: (a) Compensatory and punitive damages; (b) Injunctive and declaratory relief; (c) Attorneys' fees and costs; and (d) Such other relief as a court may deem appropriate. 3. This subdivision shall not be construed to require that a criminal charge be brought, or a criminal conviction be obtained, as a condition of bringing a civil action or receiving a civil judgment pursuant to this subdivision. e. Provisos. The prohibitions contained in subdivision b do not apply if: 1. Such disclosure or threat of disclosure is made in the course of reporting unlawful activity, in the course of a legal proceeding or by law enforcement personnel in the conduct of their authorized duties; 2. Such disclosure is made by a provider of an interactive computer service, as defined in paragraph (2) of subsection (f) of section 230 of title 47 of the United States code, with regard to content provided by another information content provider, as defined in paragraph (3) of such subsection; or 3. Such disclosure or threat of disclosure is made in relation to a matter of legitimate public concern or is otherwise protected by the first amendment of the United States constitution. § 10-181 Unlawful methods of restraint. a. Unlawful methods of restraint. No person shall restrain an individual in a manner that restricts the flow of air or blood by compressing the windpipe or the carotid arteries on each side of the neck, or sitting, kneeling, or standing on the chest or back in a manner that compresses the diaphragm, in the course of effecting or attempting to effect an arrest. b. Penalties. Any person who violates subdivision a of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than one year or a fine of not more than $2,500, or both. c. Any penalties resulting from a violation of subdivision a of this section shall not limit or preclude any cause of action available to any person or entity injured or aggrieved by such violation. § 10-182 Unlawful sale or distribution of materials that obscure license plates. a. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to sell, offer for sale or distribute any artificial or synthetic material or substance for the purpose of concealing or obscuring the number on a license plate or distorting a recorded or photographic image of such license plate. b. Authorized agents and employees of the police department, and of any other agency designated by the mayor, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of subdivision a of this section. c. Civil penalty. Any person who violates subdivision a of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $300 for the first violation and not less than $500 for each subsequent violation, which may be recoverable in a proceeding before the office of administrative trials and hearings, pursuant to chapter 45-A of the charter. § 10-183 Street harassment prevention advisory board. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Advisory board. The term advisory board means the street harassment prevention advisory board established pursuant to this section. Street harassment. The term street harassment means unwanted or unwelcome disrespectful, offensive or threatening statements, gestures or other conduct directed at a natural person in public based on the person's actual or perceived age, race, creed, color, national origin, gender, disability, sexual orientation or any other trait, status or condition. b. Advisory board established. There shall be an advisory board to advise the mayor and the council on the issue of street harassment and its prevention. c. Duties. The advisory board shall have the following duties: 1. To study the occurrence of street harassment; 2. To identify persons and communities most at risk of street harassment, and most impacted by its occurrence; 3. To develop and recommend programming and training materials for appropriate agencies to prevent and respond to street harassment, including recommendations for communication and outreach; 4. To develop and recommend programming, training and educational materials to promote public awareness and prevention of street harassment, including recommendations for communication and outreach; 5. To develop and recommend forms of support and resources for victims of street harassment, which may include identifying existing avenues for individuals to file complaints regarding discrimination or harassment; 6. To develop and recommend programming regarding non-criminalization responses to street harassment; 7. No later than December 31, 2022, to identify, recommend and make available to city agencies, for publicizing on their websites and through other methods, relevant information and resources addressing the prevention of street harassment, including, but not limited to a resource guide for victims of street harassment; 8. No later than 18 months after the effective date of the local law that added this section, and as frequently thereafter as the advisory board determines is necessary to fulfill the duties set forth in subdivision c of this section, to develop a survey for members of the public regarding the occurrence of street harassment. The advisory board shall determine the specific data elements to be collected in such survey, including but not limited to questions aimed at identifying high-risk locations, and shall collaborate with the members of the participating city offices and agencies to recommend which such city offices and agencies should conduct such survey; 9. Beginning on December 31, 2022, and no later than December 31 annually thereafter, to submit a report to the mayor and the speaker of the council that contains a summary of the advisory board's activities for the relevant reporting period, including but not limited to public outreach conducted by the participating city offices and agencies; the advisory board's recommendations for legislation and programming; and a list of materials the advisory board considered in making its recommendations; 10. Beginning with the report due December 31, 2023, and annually thereafter, the report due pursuant to paragraph 9 of this subdivision shall include a summary of findings of any survey conducted in the prior year pursuant to paragraph 8 of this subdivision; and 11. The report due pursuant to paragraph 9 of this subdivision shall be posted on the websites of the commission on gender equity and the office to end domestic and gender-based violence no later than 10 days after its submission to the mayor and the speaker of the council. d. Members. The advisory board shall be composed of the following members: 1. The director of the commission on gender equity or their designee and the director of the office to end domestic and gender-based violence or their designee, who shall serve as co-chairs of the advisory board; 2. The chair of the city commission on human rights or their designee; 3. The executive director of the office of nightlife or their designee; 4. A representative from the department of transportation; 5. A representative from the metropolitan transit authority shall be invited to participate as a member; 6. Four members appointed by the mayor; 7. Two members appointed by the speaker of the council; and 8. Two members appointed by the public advocate. Members appointed by the mayor, speaker of the council and the public advocate pursuant to paragraphs 6 through 8 of this subdivision shall: (i) be representative of all five boroughs; and (ii) have demonstrated expertise on the topic of street harassment prevention, including expertise as it relates to gender-based violence prevention, gender equity, LGBTQ rights, racial equity, religious tolerance, poverty and homelessness prevention, and immigrants' rights. e. Other participants. The co-chairs may invite officers and representatives of relevant federal, state and local agencies and authorities to participate in the work of the advisory board. f. Appointments. All appointments required by this section shall be made no later than May 1, 2022. Each member of the advisory board shall serve for a term of two years at the pleasure of the officer who appointed the member. In the event of a vacancy on the advisory board, a successor shall be appointed in the same manner as the original appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term. All members of the advisory board shall serve without compensation. g. Meetings. 1. The co-chairs shall convene the first meeting of the advisory board no later than June 1, 2022, except that where not all members of the advisory board have been appointed within the time specified in subdivision f, the co- chairs shall convene the first meeting of the advisory board within 10 days of the appointment of a quorum. 2. The advisory board shall meet no less frequently than once each quarter to carry out the duties set forth in subdivision c of this section. 3. The advisory board may invite, or accept requests from, experts and stakeholders to attend its meetings and to provide testimony and information relevant to its duties. 4. The advisory board shall, during each calendar year, make at least one of its meetings open to members of the public to solicit their input. The advisory board shall seek assistance from agencies and organizations associated with members of the advisory board to publicize such public meetings to as broad a scope of the public as possible. § 10-184 Abortion enforcement. a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Abortion. The term abortion means the procedure to terminate a pregnancy for purposes other than producing a live birth, including a termination using pharmacological agents, and any services related to such procedure, including pre-procedure and post-procedure counseling. City property. The term city property means any real property leased or owned by the city that serves a city governmental purpose and over which the city has operational control. b. No city resources, including, but not limited to, time spent by employees, officers, contractors, or subcontractors while on duty, or the use of city property, shall be utilized for: 1. The detention of a person known to have performed or aided in the performance of an abortion, or to have procured an abortion, unless there is reasonable cause to believe the abortion was not performed in accordance with article 25-a of the public health law or any state or local law that applies in New York city; or 2. Cooperating with or providing information to any individual or out- of-state agency or department that would confirm, deny, or identify any person associated with an abortion that has been lawfully performed. c. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the investigation of criminal activity which may involve the performance of an abortion not performed in accordance with article 25-a of the public health law or any other applicable state or local law, provided that no information that would identify any person associated with an abortion that has been lawfully performed may be shared with an out-of-state agency or any other individual without the prior consent of such person associated with such abortion. d. Nothing in this section shall affect any other law or rule of this state or this city that provides a person a right to any information or document to which they are legally entitled. e. Nothing in this section shall prevent a city agency from cooperating with or providing information to any individual or out-of-state agency or department for scientific study or research being undertaken for the purpose of the reduction of morbidity and mortality or the improvement of the quality of medical care. § 10-184.1 Gender-affirming care protections. a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: 1. City property. The term “city property” means any real property leased or owned by the city that serves a city governmental purpose and over which the city has operational control. 2. Gender-affirming care. The term “gender-affirming care” means medical, surgical, behavioral health, psychosocial, and other services intended to support and affirm a person’s self-determined gender identity or expression. The term “gender-affirming care” does not include sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression change efforts. 3. Seeking, obtaining, providing, or facilitating gender-affirming care. The term “seeking, obtaining, providing, or facilitating gender-affirming care” includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: expressing interest in, inducing, using, performing, furnishing, paying for, disseminating information about, arranging, insuring, assisting, or otherwise taking action to engage in gender-affirming care; or attempting any of the same. 4. Sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression change efforts. The term “sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression change efforts” means efforts intended to change a person’s self-determined gender identity or expression, or sexual orientation, including efforts to change behaviors or gender expressions or to eliminate or reduce sexual or romantic attractions or feelings toward persons of the same gender. The term “sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression change efforts does not include counseling or treatment for a person seeking to transition from one gender to another, or therapy that (i) provides acceptance, support, and understanding of a person or the facilitation of a person’s coping, social support, and identity exploration and development, including sexual orientation-neutral interventions to prevent or address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual practices, and (ii) does not seek to change sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression. b. No city resources, including, but not limited to, time spent by employees, city officers, or any person under contract to perform work or provide services for the city, while on duty, or use of city property, shall be utilized for: 1. The detention of a person on grounds that they are known or believed to have lawfully sought, obtained, provided, or facilitated gender-affirming care in the state of New York; or known or believed to have sought, obtained, provided, or facilitated gender-affirming care outside the state of New York in circumstances where such conduct would have been lawful had it occurred in the state of New York; or 2. Cooperation with an investigation of a person on grounds that such person is known or believed to have sought, obtained, provided, or facilitated gender-affirming care outside the state of New York under circumstances where their conduct would have been lawful had it occurred in the state of New York. c. For the purposes of this section, a provider whose professional license in the state where they practice would have qualified them to provide such care if it were lawful to do so in such state shall be considered to have been qualified to provide such care in the state of New York. d. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the civil or criminal investigation of a person suspected or alleged to have provided or facilitated gender-affirming care not in accordance with applicable provisions of the laws of the city and the state of New York, or cooperation in such an investigation, provided that, to the extent legally permissible, no information that may identify any person alleged to have sought or obtained gender-affirming care shall be disclosed to investigating personnel or defense counsel without the prior consent of the person alleged to have sought or obtained such care. e. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the civil or criminal investigation of a person suspected or alleged to have provided or facilitated gender-affirming care in another state in a manner that would be prohibited by the laws of the city and the state of New York, or cooperation in such an investigation, provided that, to the extent legally permissible, no information that may identify any person alleged to have sought or obtained gender- affirming care shall be disclosed to investigating personnel or defense counsel without the prior consent of the person alleged to have sought or obtained such care. f. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an agency or employee, city officer, or any person under contract to perform work or provide services for the city, while on duty, from making a disclosure relating to a person who has sought or obtained gender-affirming care when such person has consented in writing to the disclosure. g. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an agency or employee, city officer, or any person under contract to perform work or provide services for the city, while on duty, from complying with a request for information relating to a proceeding that sounds in tort or contract, or is based on or brought under federal law or regulation, statute or regulation of the state of New York, or the laws of the city, or law of another state for which there is an equivalent or similar cause of action in the state of New York; and has been brought by a person who claims to have sought or obtained gender-affirming care. h. Nothing in this section shall require an agency or employee, city officer, or any person under contract to perform work or provide services for the city, while on duty, to fail to comply with a court order from a court of competent jurisdiction. i. Nothing in this section shall prevent compliance with laws that provide persons a right to any information or document pertaining to their own gender- affirming care. j. Nothing in this section shall prevent an agency or employee, city officer, or any person under contract to perform work or provide services for the city, while on duty, from cooperating with or providing information to any person or out-of-state agency or department for scientific study or research being undertaken for the purpose of the reduction of morbidity and mortality or the improvement of the quality of medical care, provided that no information relating to any medical care provided to a specific person or that would identify any person associated with gender-affirming care that has been lawfully provided may be shared without the prior consent of such person. k. Nothing in this section shall prevent an agency or employee, city officer, or any person under contract to perform work or provide services for the city, while on duty, from taking such actions as are necessary to carry out their legal responsibilities with respect to a minor. Any disclosure made for such purposes that identifies persons who have sought, obtained, provided, or facilitated gender-affirming care, or the services related to gender-affirming care that were sought, obtained, provided, or facilitated shall be limited to the amount of information reasonably necessary to achieve the purpose of the disclosure. § 10-185 Catalytic converter etching program. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term etching means the affixing or engraving of a unique identifying number onto a catalytic converter of a motor vehicle by the police department or with a kit provided by the police department. b. Etching program for the public. Subject to appropriation, the police department shall establish a program to: 1. Provide etching to the public; and 2. Engage in an outreach campaign to inform the public about the etching program and the means by which etching may prevent theft of catalytic converters. § 10-186 Leasing commercial premises to unlicensed sellers of cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, tobacco products, and illicit cannabis. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following terms have the following meanings: Cigarette. The term “cigarette” has the same meaning as set forth in section 20-201. Electronic cigarette. The term “electronic cigarette” has the same meaning as set forth in section 20-560. Illicit cannabis. The term “illicit cannabis” has the same meaning as set forth in section 136 of the cannabis law. Owner. The term “owner” means the owner or owners of a premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent, or any other person, firm, corporation, or other entity directly or indirectly in control of a premises. Tobacco product. The term “tobacco product” has the same meaning as set forth in section 20-201. Unlicensed seller. The term “unlicensed seller” means a retailer, distributor, or other seller of cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, tobacco products, or illicit cannabis operating without a license to sell such cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, tobacco products, or illicit cannabis. b. No person shall knowingly lease a commercial premises to, or otherwise allow the use of such premises by, an unlicensed seller who uses or intends to use such commercial premises to distribute, sell, or offer to sell cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, tobacco products, or illicit cannabis. It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this subdivision that the owner of the commercial premises has commenced a proceeding to evict such unlicensed seller. c. 1. Where any agency authorized by law or designated by the mayor or an authorized state agency to inspect for violations for the unlicensed sale of cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, tobacco products, or illicit cannabis finds that an unlicensed seller is distributing, selling, or offering to sell cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, tobacco products, or illicit cannabis in commercial premises that the unlicensed seller has leased or is otherwise allowed to use, and where such property, or the portion thereof being used for such unlicensed activity, is not occupied for any other licensed or lawful purpose, such agency may provide written notice to the owner of the premises requiring such owner to ensure that the unlicensed sales of cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, tobacco products, or illicit cannabis are ceased. Such written notice shall be the basis for a violation of subdivision b of this section. 2. Such owner may appeal such written notice to such agency within 15 days of receipt of such written notice. Such agency’s decision of such appeal shall be a final determination for the purposes of article 78 of the civil practice law and rules. d. Where during a subsequent inspection, any agency authorized by law or designated by the mayor or an authorized state agency to inspect for violations for the unlicensed sale of cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, tobacco products, or illicit cannabis finds that the owner of such premises has violated subdivision b of this section and such owner is already subject to a written notice constituting a final administrative determination under subdivision c of this section regarding the same premises, such owner shall be subject to a civil summons for a violation of subdivision b of this section returnable to the office of administrative trials and hearings. The civil penalty for a violation of such subdivision shall be $5,000 for the first violation and $10,000 for each subsequent violation. Chapter 2: Unlawful Sale or Possession of Controlled Substances § 10-201 Unlawful possession of controlled substances. No person shall unlawfully posses or sell any controlled substance the possession or sale of which would constitute a felony pursuant to articles two hundred twenty or two hundred twenty-one of the penal law. § 10-202 Civil action. a. Any person who has been convicted of the possession or sale of a controlled substance in an amount which constitutes a felony pursuant to articles two hundred twenty or two hundred twenty-one of the penal law shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty in the amount of not less than ten thousand dollars nor more than one hundred thousand dollars for each count of an indictment for unlawful possession or sale which has resulted in a conviction under the penal law. b. The corporation counsel, upon notification by an appropriate law enforcement agency that there is reason to believe that a person who has been convicted of an offense under articles two hundred twenty or two hundred twenty-one of the penal law has substantial assets and that there is a significant likelihood that a civil judgment obtained pursuant to this section shall be capable of satisfaction, may commence a civil action under this section. c. In any civil action brought pursuant to this section, the city may recover, in addition to the amount set forth in subdivision a, the costs of the investigation and prosecution of the person in the criminal action resulting in conviction pursuant to articles two hundred twenty and two hundred twenty-one of the penal law, and the costs of the civil action, including reasonable attorney's fees. § 10-203 Unlawful manufacture, distribution or sale of a synthetic cannabinoid or synthetic phenethylamine. a. No person or entity shall knowingly manufacture, sell, offer for sale, display for sale, distribute for sale, or possess with intent to sell: 1. any synthetic cannabinoid or synthetic phenethylamine, as such terms are defined by part 9 of title 10 of the New York codes, rules and regulations as of the date of the violation, or as included in schedule I of the federal drug enforcement administration schedules of controlled substances, as listed in 21 CFR § 1308.11, or successor regulation, as of the date of the violation, or any cannabimimetic agent, as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 812, as of the date of the violation; or 2. any analogue of a synthetic cannabinoid, synthetic phenethylamine or cannabimimetic agent. For the purposes of this paragraph, analogue of a synthetic cannabinoid, synthetic phenethylamines or cannabimimetic agent means a substance that has a chemical structure that is substantially similar to the chemical structure of a substance described in paragraph 1 of this subdivision and has a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system that is substantially similar to or greater than the stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system of such a substance described in paragraph 1 of this subdivision; or 3. any substance commonly known as synthetic marijuana, K-2 or bath salts, including but not limited to a substance so identified as an embargoed product by order of the commissioner of the department of health and mental hygiene, that is represented as being intended for human consumption. Evidence of representations that a substance commonly known as synthetic marijuana, K- 2 or bath salts is intended for human consumption may include, but is not limited to, oral, visual or written representations by the manufacturer, distributor or seller about the substance with regard to its nature, use or effect; or 4. any purported synthetic drug. In any proceeding commenced in connection with an alleged violation of this paragraph, it shall be necessary to prove that the purported synthetic drug was represented to be a substance described in paragraph 1, 2 or 3 of this subdivision; provided, however, that it shall not be a defense to prosecution under this section that the accused believed the purported synthetic drug to be such a substance. For the purposes of this subdivision, the term purported synthetic drug means a substance that, by dosage unit appearance, including color, shape and size, and by a representation, is represented to be a substance described in paragraph 1, 2 or 3 of this subdivision. Evidence of such a representation may include, but is not limited to, oral, visual or written representations by the manufacturer, distributor or seller about the substance with regard to: (a) its price, nature, use or effect as a substance described in paragraph 1, 2 or 3 of this subdivision; or (b) its packaging in a manner normally used for substances described in paragraph 1, 2 or 3 of this subdivision. b. Possession of ten or more packets, individual containers or other separate units of a substance described in subdivision a of this section is presumptive evidence that the possessing person or entity is distributing such substance for sale or possesses such substances with intent to sell. c. Any person or entity that violates subdivision a of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment of up to one year, or both. d. In addition to the penalties prescribed in subdivision c of this section, any person or entity that violates subdivision a of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $1,000 and not more than $10,000 recoverable in a proceeding before any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or within any agency of the city of New York designated to conduct such proceedings, provided that upon the first such violation, and any other such violations by the same person or entity on the same day as such first violation, such person or entity shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $500 and not more than $5,000 if such violation is not in conjunction with the commission of any crime other than possession, manufacture, distribution or sale of any synthetic cannabinoid, synthetic phenethylamine, or other substance described in subdivision a of this section. The manufacture, distribution, sale, offer for sale, display for sale, or possession with intent to sell of each packet, individual container or other separate unit of substance described in subdivision a of this section shall constitute a separate violation under this subdivision, with a maximum civil liability of $50,000 for violations in a day for a single person or entity under this subdivision. e. Any police officer, or sheriff, undersheriff, or deputy sheriff of the city of New York, or any peace officer acting pursuant to his or her special duties may enforce the provisions of this section. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to subdivision d of this section shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or within any agency of the city of New York designated to conduct such proceedings. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged. f. Whenever a police officer, or sheriff, undersheriff, or deputy sheriff of the city of New York, or any peace officer acting pursuant to his or her special duties, discovers any substance described in subdivision a being possessed in a manner that violates such subdivision, such officer is authorized and empowered to seize and take possession of such substance, which shall be destroyed or used either for law enforcement purposes or for evidentiary purposes in connection with any enforcement proceeding conducted pursuant to this section. g. In any proceeding commenced pursuant to this section, it shall be no defense that the substance's packaging or other representation states or indicates that the substance is not intended for human consumption. h. Any person who engages in business as a retail dealer pursuant to section 20-202 of the code shall be subject to: 1. a mandatory suspension of his or her retail dealer license for a period of thirty days for a violation of this section; or 2. a mandatory revocation of his or her retail dealer license, or of any subsequent license holder, for a second or subsequent violation of this section occurring on a different day at the same place of business within a three-year period, unless the subsequent license holder provides the commissioner of the agency that has commenced the proceeding to recover a civil penalty pursuant to subdivision d of this section with adequate documentation demonstrating that such subsequent license holder acquired the premises or business through an arm's length transaction, as defined in paragraph 5 of subdivision d of section 20-202 of the code, and that the sale or lease was not conducted, in whole or in part, for the purpose of permitting the original licensee to avoid the effect of violations on the premises. Chapter 3: Firearms § 10-301 Control and regulation of the disposition, purchase and possession of firearms, rifles, shotguns and assault weapons. Definitions. Whenever used in this chapter the following terms shall mean and include: 1. Firearm. (a) Any pistol or revolver; (b) a shotgun having one or more barrels less than eighteen inches in length; or (c) a rifle having one or more barrels less than sixteen inches in length; or (d) any weapon made from a shotgun or rifle whether by alteration, modification, or otherwise if such weapon as altered, modified, or otherwise has an overall length of less than twenty-six inches. For the purpose of this subdivision the length of the barrel on a shotgun or rifle shall be determined by measuring the distance between the muzzle and the face of the bolt, breech, or breechlock when closed and when the shotgun or rifle is cocked; the overall length of a weapon made from a shotgun or rifle is the distance between the extreme ends of the weapon measured along a line parallel to the center line of the bore. Firearm does not include an antique firearm. The provisions of this chapter relating to firearms shall not apply to assault weapons except as specifically provided. 2. Rifle. A weapon designed or redesigned, made or remade, and intended to be fired from the shoulder, and, even if not designed or redesigned, made or remade, and intended to be fired from the shoulder, is not a firearm as defined in subdivision one of this section, and designed or redesigned and made or remade to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed metallic cartridge to fire only a single projectile through a rifled bore for each pull of the trigger. The provisions of this chapter relating to rifles shall not apply to assault weapons except as specifically provided. 3. Shotgun. A weapon designed or redesigned, made or remade, and intended to be fired from the shoulder, and, even if not designed or redesigned, made or remade, and intended to be fired from the shoulder, is not a firearm as defined in subdivision one of this section, and designed or redesigned and made or remade to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed shotgun shell, to fire through a smooth bore either a number of ball shot or a single projectile for each single pull of the trigger. The provisions of this chapter relating to shotguns shall not apply to assault weapons except as specifically provided. 4. Gunsmith. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or company who engages in the business of repairing, altering, assembling, manufacturing, cleaning, polishing, engraving, or trueing, or who in the course of such business performs any mechanical operation on any rifle, shotgun, firearm, assault weapon or machine gun. 5. Dealer in firearms. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or company who engages in the business of purchasing, selling, keeping for sale, loaning, leasing, or in any manner disposing of any pistol or revolver or other firearms which may be concealed upon the person. Dealer in firearms shall not include a wholesale dealer. 6. Dealer in rifles and shotguns. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or company who engages in the business of purchasing, selling, keeping for sale, loaning, leasing, or in any manner disposing of any rifle, or shotgun. Dealer in rifles and shotguns shall not include a wholesale dealer. 7. Ammunition. Explosives suitable to be fired from a firearm, machine gun, pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, assault weapon or other dangerous weapon. 8. Dispose of. To dispose of, give away, give, lease, loan, keep for sale, offer, offer for sale, sell, transfer and otherwise dispose of. 9. Deface. To remove, deface, cover, alter, or destroy the manufacturer's serial number or any other distinguishing number or identification mark. 10. Commissioner. The police commissioner of the city of New York or the commissioner's designee. 11. Permit. The permit for purchase and possession of rifles and shotguns issued by the commissioner. 12. Certificate. The certificate of registration for possession of rifles and shotguns. 13. Serious offense. A serious offense as defined in subdivision seventeen of section 265.00 of the penal law. 14. Business enterprise. Any proprietorship, company, partnership, corporation, association, cooperative, nonprofit organization or other entity engaged or seeking to engage in the activities regulated pursuant to section 10-302 of this chapter. 15. Semiautomatic. Any firearm, rifle or shotgun that uses part of the energy of a fired cartridge to expel the case of the fired cartridge and load another cartridge into the firing chamber, and which requires a separate pull of the trigger to fire each cartridge. 16. Assault weapon. (a) Any semiautomatic centerfire or rimfire rifle or semiautomatic shotgun which has one or more of the following features: 1. folding or telescoping stock or no stock; 2. pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously beneath the action of the weapon; 3. bayonet mount; 4. flash suppressor or threaded barrel designed to accommodate a flash suppressor; 5. barrel shroud; 6. grenade launcher; or 7. modifications of such features, or other features, determined by rule of the commissioner to be particularly suitable for military and not sporting purposes. In addition, the commissioner shall, by rule, designate specific semiautomatic centerfire or rimfire rifles or semiautomatic shotguns, identified by make, model and/or manufacturer's name, as within the definition of assault weapon, if the commissioner determines that such weapons are particularly suitable for military and not sporting purposes. The commissioner shall inspect such specific designated semiautomatic centerfire or rimfire rifles or semiautomatic shotguns at least three times per year, and shall revise or update such designations as he or she deems appropriate. (b) Any shotgun with a revolving-cylinder magazine. (c) Any part, or combination of parts, designed or redesigned or intended to readily convert a rifle or shotgun into an assault weapon. (d) Assault weapon shall not include any rifle or shotgun modified to render it permanently inoperative. 17. Ammunition feeding device. Magazines, belts, feedstrips, drums or clips capable of being attached to or utilized with firearms, rifles, shotguns or assault weapons. 18. Antique firearm. Any unloaded muzzle loading pistol or revolver with a matchlock, flintlock, percussion cap, or similar type of ignition system, or a pistol or revolver which uses fixed cartridges which are no longer available in the ordinary channels of commercial trade. 19. Special theatrical dealer. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or company who possesses assault weapons exclusively for the purpose of leasing such assault weapons to special theatrical permittees within the city and for theatrical purposes outside the city. 20. Acquire. To gain possession of or title to a weapon through purchase, gift, lease, loan, or otherwise. 21. Frame or receiver. Part of a firearm, rifle, shotgun or assault weapon that provides housing for the hammer, bolt or breechblock, and firing mechanism, and that is usually threaded at its forward portion to receive the barrel. 22. Unfinished frame or receiver. A piece of any material that does not constitute the frame or receiver of a firearm, rifle, shotgun or assault weapon but that has been shaped or formed in any way for the purpose of becoming the frame or receiver of a firearm, rifle, shotgun or assault weapon with modification by the user and that is not engraved with a serial number that meets or exceeds requirements pursuant to subsection (i) of section 923 of title 18 of the United States code and regulations issued pursuant thereto. § 10-302 Licensing of gunsmiths, of wholesale manufacturers of firearms, or assemblers of firearms, dealers in firearms, dealers in rifles and shotguns, and special theatrical dealers. a. It shall be unlawful for any person or business enterprise to engage in the business of gunsmith, wholesale manufacturer of firearms, assembler of firearms, dealer in firearms, dealer in rifles and shotguns, or special theatrical dealer, unless such person, or business enterprise, has obtained a license to engage in such business in the manner prescribed in this section. No person shall engage in the business of dealer in rifles and shotguns or special theatrical dealer unless he or she has been issued a permit for the possession of shotguns and rifles pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. No person or business enterprise shall be eligible to apply for or to hold a license as a special theatrical dealer unless such person or business enterprise (1) possesses both a license as a dealer in firearms and a license as a dealer in rifles and shotguns and (2) has possessed such licenses and engaged in such businesses for at least one year. b. No license shall be issued or renewed pursuant to this section except by the police commissioner, and then only after investigation and finding that all statements in a proper application for a license or renewal are true. No license shall be issued or renewed except for any applicant: (1) of good moral character; (2) who has not been convicted anywhere of a felony or of any serious offense; (3) who has stated whether he or she has ever suffered any mental illness or been confined to any hospital or institution, public or private, for mental illness and who is free from any mental disorder, defects or diseases that would impair the ability safely to possess or use a firearm, rifle or shotgun; (4) who has not been convicted of violating section 10-303.1 of this chapter; and (5) concerning whom no good cause exists for the denial of a license. c. (1) An applicant to engage in such business shall also be a citizen of the United States, more than twenty-one years of age and maintain a place of business in the city. (2) Each applicant to engage in such business shall comply with all the requirements set forth in this section. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner thereof shall comply with all the requirements set forth in this section and if the applicant is a corporation, each officer thereof shall so comply. (3) No applicant for a special theatrical dealer's license or renewal thereof shall be issued such license or renewal unless the applicant submits proof, in such form as the commissioner may require, that at least ten percent of the gross income earned by the applicant as a dealer in firearms, dealer in rifles and shotguns and, in the case of an application for renewal, special theatrical dealer, in the year preceding the application for such license or renewal, was earned from the lease for theatrical purposes of such ammunition feeding devices, firearms, rifles, shotguns or assault weapons as the applicant was authorized to lease. No applicant for a special theatrical dealer's license or renewal thereof shall be issued such license or renewal unless the gross income earned by the applicant as a dealer in firearms, dealer in rifles and shotguns and, in the case of an application for renewal, special theatrical dealer, in the year preceding the application for such license or renewal, exceeded fifty thousand dollars. d. An application for a license or renewal thereof shall be made to the police commissioner. An application shall include the full name, date of birth, residence, present occupation of each person or individual signing the same, whether he or she is a citizen of the United States, whether he or she complies with each requirement for eligibility specified in subdivision b of this section and such other facts as may be required to show the good character, competency and integrity of each person or individual signing the application. An application shall be signed and affirmed by the applicant. Each individual signing an application shall submit one photograph of himself or herself and a duplicate for each required copy of the application. Such photographs shall have been taken within thirty days prior to filing the application. The photographs submitted shall be two inches square, and the application shall also state the previous occupation of each individual signing the same and the location of the place of such business, or of the bureau, agency, subagency, office or branch office for which the license is sought, indicating the street and number and otherwise giving such apt description as to point out reasonably the location thereof. In such case, if the applicant is a business enterprise, its name, date and place of formation, and principal place of business shall be stated. For a partnership, the application shall be signed and affirmed by each partner, and for a corporation, by each officer thereof. With respect to an application for a license as a dealer in rifles and shotguns or as a special theatrical dealer, a written statement shall be submitted by the individual applicant, or in the case of a business enterprise a responsible officer or agent thereof, stating (a) the identification number of the shotgun and rifle permit issued to the individual applicant or the responsible officer or agent in the case of a business enterprise, (b) the address of a regular place of business maintained by the applicant, (c) that since the issuance of the rifle and shotgun permit the individual applicant or responsible officer or agent has not become disqualified for issuance of such a permit, (d) that he or she undertakes to supervise the acts of his or her, or in the case of a business enterprise, its employees, (e) that the applicant has not previously been refused a license as a dealer in shotguns and rifles or as a special theatrical dealer and that no such license issued to the applicant has ever been revoked. e. Before a license is issued or renewed, there shall be an investigation of all statements required in the application by the police department. For that purpose, the records of the department of mental hygiene concerning previous or present mental illness of the applicant shall be available for inspection by the investigating officer of the police department. In order to ascertain any previous criminal record, the investigating officer shall take the fingerprints and physical descriptive data in quadruplicate of each individual by whom the application is signed. Two copies of such fingerprints shall be taken on standard fingerprint cards eight inches square, and one copy may be taken on a card supplied for that purpose by the federal bureau of investigation. When completed, one standard card shall be promptly submitted to the division of criminal justice services where it shall be appropriately processed. A second standard card, or the one supplied by the federal bureau of investigation, as the case may be, shall be forwarded to that bureau at Washington with a request that the files of the bureau be searched and notification of the results of the search be made to the police department. The failure or refusal of the federal bureau of investigation to make the fingerprint check provided for in this section shall not constitute the sole basis for refusal to issue a license pursuant to the provisions of this section. Of the remaining two fingerprint cards, one shall be filed with the executive department, division of state police, Albany, within ten days after issuance of the license, and the other remain on file with the police department. No such fingerprints may be inspected by any person other than a peace officer, when acting pursuant to his or her special duties, or a police officer except on order of a judge or justice of a court of record either upon notice to the licensee or without notice, as the judge or justice may deem appropriate. Upon completion of the investigation, the police department shall report the results to the commissioner without unnecessary delay. f. Applications shall indicate and licenses shall be issued for a gunsmith, a wholesale manufacturer of firearms, an assembler of firearms, a dealer in firearms, a dealer in rifles and shotguns or a special theatrical dealer. g. The application for any license, if granted, shall be a public record. Such application shall be kept on file in the office of the police commissioner and, within ten days after the issuance of a license, a duplicate copy shall be filed in the executive department, division of state police, Albany. h. No license shall be transferable to any other person or premises. The license shall mention and describe the premises for which it is issued and shall be valid only for such premises. i. A license issued pursuant to this section shall be prominently displayed on the licensed premises. Failure of any person or business enterprise to so exhibit or display such license shall be presumptive evidence that the person or business enterprise is not duly licensed. j. Any license or renewal issued pursuant to this section shall expire on the first day of the second January following the date of issuance. Any application to renew a license that has not previously expired, been revoked or cancelled shall thereby extend the term of the license until disposition is made of the application by the police commissioner. k. The conviction of a licensee anywhere of a felony or a serious offense shall operate as a revocation of the license. Written notice of such revocation shall be forwarded to the executive division of state police in Albany. l. The police commissioner, upon evidence of any disqualification set forth in subdivision b of this section, may at any time suspend or revoke and cancel a license issued pursuant to this section. Written notice of such suspension or revocation shall be forwarded to the executive department, division of state police, Albany. m. No license shall be issued pursuant to this section unless the applicant therefor possesses and exhibits all licenses required under any federal or state law. n. Records. (1) Any person licensed under this section shall keep an accurate book record of every transaction involving a firearm, machine gun, rifle, shotgun or assault weapon. Such record shall be kept in the manner prescribed and contain the information required by the police commissioner. (2) The records required by this section shall be subject to inspection at all times by members of the police department. Such records shall be maintained on the premises mentioned and described in the license, and preserved for record. In the event of suspension, cancellation or revocation of a license, or discontinuance of business by a licensee, such record shall be immediately surrendered to the police commissioner. (3) Any person licensed under this section as a dealer in firearms or special theatrical dealer shall cause a physical inventory to be taken within the first five business days of April and October of each year, which shall include a listing of each firearm by make, caliber and serial number. The original copy of such inventory shall be securely maintained on the premises for which the license was issued. One or more additional copies shall be forwarded to such addresses as the commissioner may direct, by such means as the commissioner may direct. (4) With each copy of the inventory required under paragraph three of this subdivision shall be included an affidavit signed by the licensee (or, if the licensee is not a natural person, by an officer, general manager, or other principal of the licensee) stating under penalties of perjury that within the first five business days of that April or October, as the case may be, the signer has personally observed the firearms reported. The affidavit shall also describe the date and contents of any report required to be made pursuant to section 400.10 of the penal law. (5) In addition to the penalties specified in section 10-310, any act or omission that constitutes a violation of this subdivision or of rules and regulations issued by the commissioner pursuant thereto shall be grounds for the revocation of a license issued by the commissioner pursuant to this section. o. Rules and regulations. (1) The police commissioner may make and promulgate such rules and regulations regarding the issuance and renewal of such licenses and the reporting of inventory of firearms, loss of firearms, and theft of firearms and may prescribe such forms as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. (2) Such rules and regulations shall prescribe reasonable standards and conditions under which firearms, component parts of firearms, rifles, shotguns, assault weapons and ammunition shall be kept at the store or premises of gunsmiths, including store and plant security, employment, record keeping and product quality control for the protection of the public safety, health and welfare. The foregoing enumeration shall not be construed as a limitation of the police commissioner's authority to promulgate rules and regulations hereunder. (3) The violation of such rules and regulations shall be triable by a judge of the criminal court of the city of New York and punishable by not more than thirty days imprisonment or by a fine of not more than fifty dollars, or both. p. The annual license fee for a license issued pursuant to this section shall be twenty-five dollars for gunsmiths, wholesale manufacturers and assemblers of firearms, fifty dollars for dealers in firearms, and one hundred fifty dollars for dealers in rifles and shotguns and special theatrical dealers. q. Failure to obtain a license, by any person, firm, partnership, corporation or company, as required by the provisions of this section shall be punishable as a class A misdemeanor. r. No dealer in rifles and shotguns may dispose of a rifle or shotgun to any person unless such person produces a valid rifle and shotgun permit, or proof of lawful authority as a police or peace officer, or is an exempt person as provided in this chapter. s. Any suspension, denial or revocation of a license may be appealed by the applicant or licensee pursuant to procedures established by the police commissioner for administrative review. § 10-302.1 Preventing the diversion of firearms, rifles and shotguns to criminals. Preventing the diversion of firearms, rifles and shotguns to criminals. a. No dealer in firearms and no dealer in rifles and shotguns shall: (i) sell or otherwise dispose of more than one firearm or more than one rifle or shotgun to any individual as part of the same sales transaction; or (ii) sell or otherwise dispose of a rifle or shotgun to any individual if the dealer knows or should know that such individual has purchased a rifle or shotgun within the prior ninety days, or (iii) sell or otherwise dispose of a firearm to any individual if the dealer knows or should know that such individual has purchased a firearm within the prior ninety days. b. No person shall acquire a firearm if such person has acquired a firearm within the previous ninety days. No person shall acquire a rifle or shotgun if such person has acquired a rifle or shotgun within the previous ninety days. For purposes of this subdivision when a firearm, rifle or shotgun is acquired by a corporation, partnership, or other entity, it shall be considered to have been acquired by each natural person who is an officer, director or other principal of such entity, unless the firearm, rifle or shotgun is acquired on behalf of such entity by a person who is licensed by the commissioner as gun custodian or special gun custodian, or acquired on behalf of an organization possessing an organization registration certificate, as those terms are used in title thirty-eight of the rules of the city of New York. c. Before disposing of any firearm, rifle or shotgun to a person licensed by the commissioner to possess firearms, rifles or shotguns, any dealer in firearms, dealer in rifles and shotguns or other person shall contact the police department to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. d. Any dealer in firearms, dealer in rifles and shotguns or other person who disposes of any firearm, rifle or shotgun to a person licensed by an authority other than the commissioner to possess firearms, rifles or shotguns shall make reasonable efforts to contact such licensing authority and to ascertain the most recent date of acquisition by such licensee of a firearm, in the case of disposition of a firearm, or of a rifle or shotgun, in the case of disposition of a rifle or shotgun. e. Any dealer in firearms or dealer in rifles or shotguns who disposes of any firearm, rifle or shotgun shall, before or at the time of disposing of such firearm, rifle or shotgun, record, in the record book required to be kept by subdivision n of section 10-302, the efforts made by such dealer to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section, any exception or exemption set forth in this section that such dealer reasonably believes would authorize the disposal of such firearm, rifle or shotgun, and the grounds for such dealer's belief that such exception or exemption applies. f. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale of firearms, rifles or shotguns to (i) a police officer, as such term is defined in section 1.20 of the criminal procedure law, (ii) a federal law enforcement officer, as such term is defined in section 2.15 of the criminal procedure law, (iii) a public agency in furtherance of official business, (iv) persons in the military service of the state of New York, when duly authorized by regulations issued by the adjutant general to possess such weapons, (v) persons in the military or other service of the United States, in pursuit of official duty or when duly authorized by federal law, regulation or order to possess such weapons, (vi) persons employed in fulfilling defense contracts with the government of the United States or agencies thereof when possession of such weapons is necessary for manufacture, transport, installation and testing under the requirements of such contract, (vii) peace officers as defined in section 2.10 of the criminal procedure law, provided that such peace officers are authorized pursuant to law or regulation of the state or city of New York to possess a firearm, rifle or shotgun within the city of New York without a license or permit therefor, and are authorized by their employer to possess such firearm, rifle or shotgun, (viii) persons licensed as dealers, manufacturers or importers of firearms pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Chapter 44, (ix) any motion picture, television or video production company or entertainment or theatrical company whose production involves the use of firearms, rifles or shotguns, provided that such weapons shall be properly registered and a special theatrical permit shall have been issued for such weapons pursuant to rules established by the commissioner, (x) with respect to the sale of firearms only, persons licensed by the commissioner as gun custodians or special gun custodians, as those terms are used in title thirty-eight of the rules of the city of New York, and (xi) with respect to the sale of rifles and shotguns only, organizations possessing an organization registration certificate, as that term is used in title thirty-eight of the rules of the city of New York. g. Exempt transactions. The requirements of this section shall not apply to: (i) any transaction in which a person acquires a firearm, rifle or shotgun by operation of law, or because of the death of another person for whom such person is an executor or administrator of an estate or a trustee of a trust created in a will, provided that within fifteen days such person surrenders such firearm, rifle or shotgun to the commissioner until it can be reacquired without violation of this section or other applicable law. If a firearm, rifle or shotgun is surrendered pursuant to this subdivision but no written request to reacquire it is received by the commissioner within two years of such surrender, the commissioner shall dispose of such firearm in accordance with the provisions of section 400.05 of the penal law; (ii) the exchange of a firearm, rifle or shotgun by a dealer in firearms or a dealer in rifles and shotguns for another firearm, rifle or shotgun previously purchased from such dealer by the person requesting such exchange, provided that such exchange takes place within thirty days of such request; (iii) the acquisition or disposal of an antique firearm, rifle or shotgun which is incapable of being fired or discharged or which does not fire fixed ammunition, or a firearm, rifle or shotgun manufactured prior to eighteen hundred ninety-four or whose design was patented and whose commercial manufacture commenced prior to eighteen hundred ninety-four and whose manufacture continued after such year without any substantial alteration in design or function, and for which cartridge ammunition is not commercially available and is possessed as a curiosity or ornament or for its historical significance and value; (iv) the acquisition or disposal of a firearm at an indoor or outdoor pistol range when such acquisition or disposal begins a period of possession or use of the firearm that is authorized by paragraphs 7-a, 7-b, or 7-e of subdivision a of section 265.20 of the penal law; (v) the sale of a firearm by a dealer in firearms to a person whose firearm is stolen or irretrievably lost, provided that: (1) such person has complied with any legal requirement to report the loss or theft, including but not limited to the applicable provisions of title thirty-eight of the rules of the city of New York and section 400.10 of the penal law; (2) such person provides to such dealer a copy of a police report of the loss or theft or of any report made pursuant to the applicable provisions of title thirty-eight of the rules of the city of New York and section 400.10 of the penal law, which copy the dealer shall attach to the record book required to be kept by subdivision n of section 10-302; (3) the copy provided pursuant to subparagraph two of this paragraph contains the name and address of the regulated firearm owner, a description of the regulated firearm, the location of the loss or theft, if known, the date of the loss or theft, if known, and the date when the loss or theft was reported to the law enforcement agency; and (4) such person's attempt to replace the regulated firearm occurs within thirty days of the loss or theft of such firearm, if known, or, if such date is not known, within thirty days of the date when the loss or theft was reported to the law enforcement agency, as reflected by the information recorded on the police report; and (vi) any other transaction authorized in advance in writing by the commissioner. h. Penalties. (i) In addition to the penalties specified in section 10-310, any act or omission that constitutes or would constitute a violation of this section or of rules and regulations issued by the commissioner pursuant thereto shall be grounds for the revocation of a license to deal in firearms, deal in rifles and shotguns, possess firearms, or possess a rifle or shotgun. (ii) Any firearm disposed of or acquired in violation of this section shall be a nuisance subject to surrender and forfeiture in accordance with the procedures specified in section 400.05 of the penal law. i. The commissioner may make and promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. Such rules and regulations may address, but need not be limited to: (i) procedures for implementation of this section by the commissioner; (ii) establishment of a database of firearm, rifle and shotgun purchases for the purpose of enforcing the requirements of this chapter; and (iii) the specification of reasonable efforts required to comply with subdivision d of this section. It shall be unlawful to dispose of any rifle or shotgun to any person unless said person is the holder of a permit for possession and purchase of rifles and shotguns; it shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any rifle or shotgun unless said person is the holder of a permit for the possession and purchase of rifles and shotguns. The disposition of a rifle or shotgun, by any licensed dealer in rifles and shotguns, to any person presenting a valid rifle and shotgun permit issued to such person, shall be conclusive proof of the legality of such disposition by the dealer. a. Requirements. No person shall be denied a permit to purchase and possess a rifle or shotgun unless the applicant: (1) is under the age of twenty-one; or (2) is not of good moral character; or (3) has been convicted anywhere of a felony; of a serious offense as defined in §265.00 (17) of the New York State Penal Law; of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence as defined in 18 U.S.C. § 921(a); of a misdemeanor crime of assault as defined in the penal law where the applicant was convicted of such assault within the ten years preceding the submission of the application; or of any three misdemeanors as defined in local, state or federal law, however nothing in this paragraph shall preclude the denial of a permit to an applicant with fewer than three misdemeanor convictions; or (4) has not stated whether he or she has ever suffered any mental illness or been confined to any hospital or institution, public or private, for mental illness; or (5) is not now free from any mental disorders, defects or diseases that would impair the ability safely to possess or use a rifle or shotgun; or (6) has been the subject of a suspension or ineligibility order issue pursuant to §530.14 of the New York State Criminal Procedure Law or §842-a of the New York State Family Court Act; or (7) who is subject to a court order that (a) was issued after a hearing of which such person received actual notice, and at which such person had the opportunity to participate; (b) restrains such person from harassing, stalking, or threatening an intimate partner of such person or child of such intimate partner or person, or engaging in other conduct that would place an intimate partner in reasonable fear of bodily injury to the partner or child; and (c) (i) includes a finding that such person represents a credible threat to the physical safety of such intimate partner or child; or (ii) by its terms explicitly prohibits the use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical force against such intimate partner or child that would reasonably be expected to cause bodily injury; (d) For purposes of this section only, intimate partner means, with respect to a person, the spouse of the person, a former spouse of the person, an individual who is a parent of a child of the person, and an individual who cohabitates or has cohabited with the person; or (8) has been convicted of violating section 10-303.1 of this chapter; or (9) unless good cause exists for the denial of the permit. b. Application. Application for a rifle and shotgun permit shall be made to the police commissioner, shall be signed and affirmed by the applicant and shall state his or her full name, date of birth, residence, physical condition, occupation and whether he or she complies with each requirement specified in subdivision a of this section, and any other information required by the police commissioner to process the application. Each applicant shall submit with his or her application a photograph of himself or herself in duplicate, which shall have been taken within thirty days prior to the filing of the application. Any willful or material omission or false statement shall be a violation of this section and grounds for denial of the application. c. Before a permit is issued or renewed, the police department shall investigate all statements required in the application. For that purpose, the records of the department of mental hygiene concerning previous or present mental illness of the applicant shall be available for inspection by the investigating officer of the police department. In order to ascertain any previous criminal record, the investigating officer shall take the fingerprints and physical descriptive data in quadruplicate of each individual by whom the application is signed. Two copies of such fingerprints shall be taken on standard fingerprint cards eight inches square, and one copy may be taken on a card supplied for that purpose by the federal bureau of investigation. When completed, one standard card shall be promptly submitted to the division of criminal justice services where it shall be appropriately processed. A second standard card, or the one supplied by the federal bureau of investigation, as the case may be, shall be forwarded to that bureau at Washington with a request that the files of the bureau be searched and notification of the results of the search be made to the police department. The failure or refusal of the federal bureau of investigation to make the fingerprint check provided for in this section shall not constitute the sole basis for refusal to issue a permit pursuant to the provisions of this section. Of the remaining two fingerprint cards, one shall be filed with the executive department, division of state police, Albany, within ten days after issuance of the permit, and the other remain on file with the police department. No such fingerprints may be inspected by any person other than a peace officer, when acting pursuant to his or her special duties, or a police officer, except on order of a justice of a court of record either upon notice to the permittee or without notice, as the judge or justice may deem appropriate. Upon completion of the investigation, the police department shall report the results to the police commissioner without unnecessary delay. d. Fees. The fee for an application for a rifle and shotgun permit or renewal thereof shall be one hundred forty dollars. e. Issuance. (1) Upon completion of the investigation, and in no event later than thirty days from the submission of the application, unless the police commissioner determines more time is needed for an investigation and then it shall not exceed sixty days, the commissioner shall issue the permit or shall notify the applicant of the denial of the application and the reason or reasons therefor. The applicant shall have the right to appeal said denial pursuant to procedures established by the police commissioner for administrative review. (2) Any person holding a valid license to carry a concealed weapon in accordance with the provisions of the penal law, shall be issued such permit upon filing an application and upon paying the established fee therefor, without the necessity of any further investigation, affidavits or fingerprinting, unless the police commissioner has reason to believe that the status of the applicant has changed since the issuance of the prior license. f. Validity. Any person to whom a rifle and shotgun permit has been validly issued pursuant to this chapter may possess a rifle or shotgun. No permit shall be transferred to any other person. Every person carrying a rifle or shotgun shall have on his or her person a permit which shall be exhibited for inspection to any peace officer or police officer upon demand. Failure of any such person to so exhibit his or her permit shall be presumptive evidence that he or she is not duly authorized to possess a rifle or shotgun and the same may be considered by the police commissioner as cause for revocation or suspension of such permit. A permit shall be valid for three (3) years and shall be subject to automatic renewal, upon sworn application, and without investigation, unless the police commissioner has reason to believe that the status of the applicant has changed since the previous application. g. Revocation or suspension. A permit shall be revoked upon the conviction in this state, or elsewhere, of a person holding a rifle or shotgun permit, of a felony or a serious offense. A permit may be revoked or suspended at any time upon evidence of any other disqualification set forth in subdivision a of this section. Upon revocation or suspension of a permit for any reason, the police commissioner shall immediately notify the New York state division of criminal justice services. The police commissioner shall from time to time send a notice and supplemental report hereof, containing the names, addresses and permit numbers of each person whose rifle and shotgun permit has been revoked or suspended to all licensed dealers in rifles and shotguns throughout the city for the purpose of notifying such dealers that no rifles or shotguns may be issued or sold or in any way disposed of to any such persons. The police commissioner or any police officer acting at the police commissioner's direction shall forthwith seize any rifle and shotgun permit which has been revoked or suspended hereunder and shall seize any rifle or shotgun possessed by such person, provided that the person whose rifle or shotgun permit has been revoked or suspended, or such person's appointee or legal representative, shall have the right at any time up to one year after such seizure to dispose of such rifle or shotgun to any licensed dealer or any other person legally permitted to purchase or take possession of such rifle or shotgun. The permittee shall have the right to appeal any suspension or revocation pursuant to procedures established by the commissioner for administrative review. h. Non-residents. Non-residents of the city of New York may apply for a rifle or shotgun permit subject to the same conditions, regulations and requirements as residents of the city of New York. § 10-303.1 Prohibition of the possession or disposition of assault weapons. a. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or dispose of any assault weapon within the city of New York, except as provided in subdivision d, e or f of this section or section 10-305. A person who peaceably surrenders an assault weapon to the commissioner pursuant to subdivision d, e or f of this section or subdivision f of section 10-305 shall not be subject to the criminal or civil penalties set forth in this section. b. Criminal penalty. Any person who shall violate subdivision a of this section shall be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five thousand dollars or by imprisonment of up to one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for each assault weapon disposed of or possessed, provided that the first violation of subdivision a of this section involving possession of an assault weapon as defined in paragraph c of subdivision 16 of section 10-301 shall be an offense punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars of imprisonment of not more than fifteen days, or both, on condition that (1) such first violation is not in conjunction with the commission of a crime and (2) the possessor has not been previously convicted of a felony or a serious offense. c. Civil penalty. In addition to the penalties prescribed in subdivision b of this section, any person who shall violate subdivision a of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than twenty-five thousand dollars for each assault weapon disposed of or possessed, to be recovered in a civil action brought by the corporation counsel in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, provided that the first violation by any person of subdivision a of this section involving possession of an assault weapon as defined in paragraph c of subdivision sixteen of section 10-301 shall subject such person to a civil penalty of not more than five thousand dollars on condition that (1) such first violation is not in conjunction with the commission of a crime and (2) the possessor has not been previously convicted of a felony or a serious offense. d. Disposition of assault weapons by permittees, licensees and previously exempt persons. Any person who, on or after the effective date of this local law, shall possess an assault weapon and a valid permit for possession and purchase of rifles and shotguns and a certificate of registration for such assault weapon, and any licensed dealer in firearms or licensed dealer in rifles and shotguns who is not licensed as a special theatrical dealer and who, on or after the effective date of this local law, shall possess an assault weapon, and any police officer or peace officer who, before the effective date of this local law was exempt from the sections of the administrative code requiring rifle and shotgun permits and certificates, and who, upon the effective date of this local law, is not exempt from the sections of the administrative code prohibiting the possession or disposition of assault weapons, and who, on or after the effective date of this local law, shall possess an assault weapon, shall, within ninety days of the effective date of rules promulgated by the commissioner pursuant to subparagraph 7 of paragraph a of subdivision 16 of section 10-301, either: (1) peaceably surrender his or her assault weapon pursuant to subdivision f of section 10-305 for the purpose of destruction of such weapon by the commissioner, provided that the commissioner may authorize the use of such weapon by the department; or (2) lawfully remove such assault weapon from the city of New York. All assault weapons possessed by such permittees, licensees and previously exempt persons shall be subject to the provisions of this subdivision, whether defined as assault weapons in subdivision 16 of section 10-301 or in rules promulgated by the commissioner pursuant to subparagraph 7 of paragraph a of subdivision 16 of section 10-301. e. Disposition of assault weapons by non-permittees. Any person who, on or after the effective date of this local law, shall possess an assault weapon and who is not the holder of a valid permit for possession and purchase of rifles and shotguns and a certificate of registration for such assault weapon, shall peaceably surrender his or her assault weapon pursuant to subdivision f of section 10-305 for the purpose of destruction of such weapon by the commissioner, provided that the commissioner may authorize the use of such weapon by the department, and provided further that heirs and legatees may dispose of assault weapons pursuant to subdivision f of this section. f. Disposition of assault weapons by heirs and legatees. Any person who acquires an assault weapon on or after the effective date of this local law by the laws of intestacy or by testamentary bequest shall, within ninety days of such acquisition, either: (1) peaceably surrender such assault weapon pursuant to subdivision f of section 10-305 for the purpose of destruction of such weapon by the commissioner, provided that the commissioner may authorize the use of such weapon by the department; or (2) lawfully remove such assault weapon from the city of New York. g. Within thirty days of the effective date of rules promulgated by the commissioner pursuant to subparagraph 7 of paragraph a of subdivision 16 of section 10-301, the commissioner shall send by regular mail to every person who has been issued a permit to possess a rifle or shotgun and whose rifle or shotgun the commissioner reasonably believes to be an assault weapon as defined in subdivision 16 of section 10-301 or as defined in such rules, a written notice setting forth the requirements and procedures relating to the disposition of such weapons, and the criminal and civil penalties that may be imposed upon the permittee for unlawful possession or disposition of such weapons. Failure by the commissioner to send, or the permittee to receive, such notice, shall not excuse such permittee for unlawful possession or disposition of such weapons. h. Surrender of firearms. At the discretion of the police commissioner, any person convicted of violating this section may be subject to immediate surrender of all firearms in his or her possession. § 10-303.2 Civil penalty; firearms dealers and manufacturers. §10-303.2 Civil penalty; firearms dealers and manufacturers. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the terms firearm, handgun, dealer, collector, and manufacturer shall have the meanings set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 921, as such section may be amended from time to time, or any successor provision thereto. The term transfer shall be deemed to include any sale, assignment, pledge, lease, loan, gift or other disposition. References to statutes, laws or regulations shall be deemed to include federal, state and local statutes, laws, local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. b. Manufacturer and Dealer Liability. A manufacturer or dealer shall be liable for any injury or death caused by a firearm that it has transferred, if (i) such injury or death results from the use of such firearm by an individual not authorized by law to possess such firearm in the city of New York, and (ii) such manufacturer or dealer, or any other individual or entity acting subsequent to such manufacturer or dealer, unlawfully transferred such firearm at any time prior to such injury or death. Such liability also includes the possible imposition of punitive damages. Liability under this section does not extend to any manufacturer or dealer that has complied with the following standards during a period of one year immediately preceding and including the transfer of such firearm: (1) The manufacturer or dealer executes no transfers or agreements to transfer at gun shows except for gun shows that maintain a practice of performing instant criminal background checks consistent with 18 U.S.C. § 922 (t), as such subsection may be amended from time to time and any successor provision thereto, on all transfers, whether by licensed or unlicensed sellers. (2) Any place of business operated by the manufacturer or dealer is located at a fixed address where: (a) a record is maintained, as may be required by any statute, law or regulation, of the make, model, caliber or gauge, and serial number of all firearms held in inventory or offered for sale; and (b) a record is maintained, as may be required by any statute, law or regulation, of the make, model, caliber or gauge, and serial number of all firearms sold, and of any identifying information required by any such statute, law or regulation to be obtained from purchasers; (3) The manufacturer or dealer provides access to the aforementioned records to officers, employees and agents of public agencies conducting inspections, to the full extent required by applicable statutes, laws and regulations; (4) The manufacturer or dealer limits transfers to any individual or entity to one handgun in any given thirty-day period, provided that this paragraph shall not apply to lawful transfers to (a) public agencies in furtherance of official business; (b) law enforcement officers employed by public agencies; (c) private security firms, holding any permits or licenses required by applicable statutes, laws and regulations, for the use of their agents and employees; (d) private operators of state and local correctional facilities, for the use of their agents and employees; or (e) licensed manufacturers, licensed dealers or licensed collectors, as those terms are defined by 18 U.S.C. § 921, as such section may be amended from time to time, or any successor provision thereto; (5) The manufacturer or dealer has complied with all applicable statutes, laws and regulations governing the transfer of firearms; and (6) The manufacturer or dealer has not transferred a firearm to any other manufacturer or dealer in circumstances in which the manufacturer or dealer transferring such firearm knew or should have known that such manufacturer or dealer had not complied with the standards set forth in this subdivision. c. Exceptions. (1) No action may be commenced pursuant to this section by any person injured or killed by the discharge of a firearm that is lawfully possessed by a law enforcement official employed by a public agency. (2) This section shall not limit in scope any cause of action, other than that provided by this section, available to a person injured by or killed by a firearm. (3) Nothing in this section shall prevent a manufacturer or dealer from seeking whole or partial indemnity or contribution for any liability incurred under this section from any third party wholly or partially responsible for the injury or death. (4) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision b, there shall be no basis for liability under this section if the manufacturer or dealer proves by a preponderance of the evidence that: (i) the person injured or killed by the discharge of a firearm was committing or attempting to commit a crime (whether or not such crime is actually charged); (ii) the unlawful transfer or possession of the firearm is solely a result of the failure of the owner of the firearm to renew a license, permit or registration within six months of the date such renewal is required; or (iii) prior to the injury or death caused by the firearm, a lawful possessor of the firearm has reported its theft to a federal, state or local law enforcement agency, or reported its loss to an appropriate public agency. (5) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision b, there shall be no basis for liability under this section if the manufacturer or dealer proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the manufacturer or dealer lawfully transferred the firearm to: (i) a public agency in furtherance of official business; (ii) a law enforcement officer employed by a public agency; (iii) a private security firm, holding any permits or licenses required by applicable statutes, laws and regulations, for the use of its agents and employees; or (iv) a private operator of a state or local correctional facility for the use of its agents and employees. (6) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision b, there shall be no basis for liability under this section if the manufacturer or dealer proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the injury or death is not directly or indirectly related to any act or omission by such manufacturer or dealer, including but not limited to any failure by the manufacturer or dealer to comply with the standards set forth in subdivision b of this section. § 10-304 Certificates of registration. a. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any rifle or shotgun unless said person is the holder of a certificate of registration for such rifle or shotgun. b. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a licensed dealer to dispose of any rifle or shotgun for which such person does not have a certificate of registration unless such person files with the police commissioner a declaration in duplicate, signed and affirmed by the declarant which shall list by caliber, make, model, manufacturer's name and serial number, or if none, any other distinguishing number or identification mark, of each rifle and shotgun possessed by the declarant. Upon receipt of acknowledgement of said declaration by the police commissioner, the declarant may lawfully sell, transfer, or otherwise dispose of such rifles or shotguns to a licensed dealer or any other person legally permitted to purchase or take possession of such rifles or shotguns. Any willful or material omission or false statement shall be a violation of this section. c. Exhibition of certificate. Every person carrying a rifle or shotgun shall have on his or her person a certificate of registration valid for such weapon. Upon demand, the appropriate certificate shall be exhibited for inspection to any peace officer or police officer. Failure of any person to so exhibit his or her certificate shall be presumptive evidence that he or she is not duly authorized to possess such rifle or shotgun and may be considered by the police commissioner as cause for revocation or suspension of such person's permit. d. Revocation. The revocation of a rifle or shotgun permit shall automatically be deemed to be a revocation of all certificates of registration for rifles and shotguns held by the person whose permit has been revoked. e. Disposition of rifles and shotguns. No person lawfully in possession of a rifle or shotgun shall dispose of same except to a licensed dealer in firearms, licensed dealer in rifles and shotguns, the holder of a valid rifle and shotgun permit, an exempt person as enumerated in this chapter, or a non- resident of the city of New York not subject to the permit requirements of this chapter. Any person so disposing of a rifle or shotgun shall report the disposition on forms provided by the commissioner setting forth the rifle and shotgun permit number of both seller and purchaser, the make, caliber, type, model and serial number, if any, and if the seller is a licensed dealer the certificate of registration number, of all such rifles and shotguns. Such form shall be signed by both seller and purchaser and the original shall be forwarded to the police commissioner within seventytwo hours of the disposition, one copy shall be retained by the seller, another by the purchaser. 1. If the seller is a licensed dealer, he or she shall at the time of the sale issue a certificate of registration to the purchaser provided to the dealer for that purpose by the police commissioner and shall forward to the police commissioner the duplicate thereof, together with the report of disposition. 2. If the seller is not a licensed dealer, the police commissioner shall, if the purchaser's rifle permit is valid, issue the certificate of registration within ten days of the receipt by the police commissioner of the report of disposition. Pending receipt of the certificate, but in no event for any longer than fourteen days from the date of purchase, the copy of the report of disposition shall serve in lieu of the purchaser's certificate of registration. f. No fee shall be charged for a certificate of registration. g. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section concerning the transfer, receipt, acquisition, or any other disposition of a rifle or shotgun, a rifle and shotgun permit shall not be required for the passing of a rifle or shotgun upon the death of an owner, to his or her heir or legatee, whether the same be by testamentary bequest or by the laws of intestacy, except that the person who shall so receive or acquire said rifle or shotgun shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter, provided further that if the heir or legatee of the owner of such rifle or shotgun does not qualify to possess same under this chapter, the rifle or shotgun may be possessed by the heir or legatee for the purpose of sale as otherwise provided herein for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty days or for such further limited period beyond the one hundred eighty days as may be approved by the commissioner, said extensions in no event to exceed a total of ninety days. § 10-305 Exemptions. The sections requiring rifle and shotgun permits and certificates and prohibiting the possession or disposition of assault weapons shall not apply as follows: a. Minors. Any person under the age of twenty-one years may carry, fire, or use any rifle or shotgun in the actual presence or under the direct supervision of any person who is a holder of a rifle or shotgun permit, or for the purpose of military drill under the auspices of a legally recognized organization and under competent supervision or for the purpose of competition or target practice in and upon a firing range approved by the police commissioner or any other governmental agency authorized to provide such approval, or the national rifle association, which is under competent supervision at the time of such competition or target practice, provided that the rifle or shotgun is otherwise properly registered or exempt from registration by virtue of some other provision of this chapter. This exemption shall not apply to assault weapons. b. Antiques and ornaments. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to antique rifles and shotguns which are incapable of being fired or discharged or which do not fire fixed ammunition, or those weapons manufactured prior to eighteen hundred ninety-four and those weapons whose design was patented and whose commercial manufacture commenced prior to eighteen hundred ninety-four and whose manufacture continued after eighteen hundred ninety-four without any substantial alteration in design or function, and for which cartridge ammunition is not commercially available and are possessed as curiosities or ornaments or for their historical significance and value. This exemption shall not apply to assault weapons. c. Persons in the military service in the state of New York, when duly authorized by regulations issued by the chief of staff to the governor to possess the same, and police officers, provided that such police officers shall not be exempt from the sections prohibiting the possession or disposition of assault weapons except during the performance of their duties as police officers, and other peace officers as defined in section 2.10 of the criminal procedure law, provided that such peace officers (1) are authorized pursuant to law or regulation of the state or city of New York to possess either (a) a firearm within the city of New York without a license or permit therefor, or (b) a rifle, shotgun or assault weapon within the city of New York without a permit therefor; and (2) are authorized by their employer to possess such rifle, shotgun or assault weapon; and (3) shall not possess such rifle, shotgun or assault weapon except during the performance of their duties as peace officers. d. Persons in the military or other service of the United States, in pursuit of official duty or when duly authorized by federal law, regulation or order to possess the same. e. Persons employed in fulfilling defense contracts with the government of the United States or agencies thereof when possession of the same is necessary for manufacture, transport, installation and testing under the requirements of such contract. Any such person exempted by subdivisions c, d and e above, may purchase a rifle or shotgun only from a licensed dealer, and must submit to the dealer full and clear proof of identification, including shield number, serial number, military or governmental order or authorization, and military or other official identification. Any dealer who disposes of a rifle or shotgun to any exempt person without securing such identification shall be in violation of these sections. f. A person may voluntarily surrender a rifle, shotgun or assault weapon to the police commissioner, provided, that the same shall be surrendered by such person only after he or she gives notice in writing to the police commissioner, stating such person's name, address, the type of gun to be surrendered, and the approximate time of day and the place where such surrender shall take place and such time of day and place have been approved in writing by the police commissioner. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed as granting immunity from prosecution for any crime or offense except that of unlawful possession of such rifle, shotgun or assault weapon. g. The regular and ordinary transport of rifles, shotguns or assault weapons as merchandise provided that the person transporting such rifles, shotguns or assault weapons where he or she knows or has reasonable means of ascertaining what such person is transporting, notifies, in writing, the police commissioner of the name and address of the consignee and the place of delivery, and withholds delivery to the consignee for such reasonable period of time designated in writing by the police commissioner as the police commissioner may deem necessary for investigation as to whether the consignee may lawfully receive and possess such rifles, shotguns or assault weapons. h. Possession by retail customers for the purpose of firing at duly licensed rifle target concessions at amusement parks, piers, and similar locations provided that the rifles to be so used by firmly chained or affixed to the counter and that the individual rifles are registered by the proprietor and that the proprietor is in possession of a rifle and shotgun permit. This exemption shall not apply to assault weapons. i. (1) Non-residents in transit. Any other provision of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, a non-resident of the city of New York who, without a rifle and shotgun permit issued hereunder, enters the city of New York possessing a rifle or shotgun in the course of transit to a destination outside the city of New York, or a non-resident of the city of New York who enters the city of New York possessing an assault weapon in the course of transit to a destination outside the city of New York, shall have a period of twenty-four hours subsequent to such entering to be exempt from penalty under this chapter for the unlawful possession of a rifle, shotgun or assault weapon, provided that such rifle, shotgun or assault weapon shall at all times be unloaded and in a locked case, or locked automobile trunk, and that said non- resident is lawfully in possession of said rifle, shotgun or assault weapon according to the laws of his or her place of residence. (2) Non-residents purchasing a rifle or shotgun from a licensed dealer. Any other provision of this chapter notwithstanding, a non-resident of the city of New York may purchase a rifle or shotgun from a licensed dealer provided that he or she presents the dealer with documentary evidence of his or her identity and place of residence, and the rifle or shotgun purchased is either personally delivered to the purchaser or transmitted by the dealer directly to the purchaser's residence. In the event the purchaser is traveling from the city by rail, ship or plane, the dealer is hereby authorized to deliver such rifle or shotgun at the appropriate terminal to a representative of the railroad, airline or shipping company, for placement aboard such train, plane or ship. If the rifle or shotgun is personally delivered to the non-resident purchaser within the city of New York, the purchaser shall have the rifle or shotgun removed from the city no later than twenty-four hours after the time of purchase. This exemption shall not apply to assault weapons. j. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to be a prohibition of the conduct of business by manufacturers, wholesale dealers, interstate shippers, or any other individuals or firms properly licensed by the federal government, where such prohibition would be preempted by federal law. k. Special theatrical permit. Nothing herein contained is intended to prevent the possession or utilization of any rifle, shotgun or assault weapon during the course of any television, movie, stage or other similar theatrical production, or by a professional photographer in the pursuance of his or her profession, provided however, that the rifle or shotgun so used shall be properly registered and a special theatrical permit shall have been issued for the rifle, shotgun or assault weapon pursuant to rules established by the commissioner. l. Persons in possession of, using or transporting rifles which have been issued by the director of civilian marksmanship of the department of the army, pursuant to the provisions of 10 U.S.C. 4307-4309, unto a civilian rifle club, or unto a rifle team representing an educational institution, provided that such persons are members in good standing of an accredited civilian rifle club, or are connected as students or coaches with such educational institution, shall not be required to obtain a certificate of registration for such rifle. This exemption shall not apply to assault weapons. m. Any resident of the city of New York acquiring a rifle or shotgun outside the city of New York shall within seventy-two hours after bringing such weapon into the city make application for a rifle and shotgun permit, if such person does not already possess such permit, and for a certificate of registration. Pending the issuance of such permit and/or certificate of registration such resident shall deposit such weapon with a designated officer, at the police precinct in which such person resides, who shall issue a receipt therefor and said weapon shall be retained at the precinct until the resident shall produce the proper permit and registration certificate. This exemption shall not apply to assault weapons. n. The provisions of section 10-303 of this chapter shall not apply to persons who are members of units of war veterans organizations, which organizations are duly recognized by the veterans administration, pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 3402, and who are specifically designated to carry rifles or shotguns by the commanders of said units, while actually participating in, going to or returning from, special events authorized by the commissioner. Said rifles or shotguns, to be carried, must be the property of the unit of the war veterans organization, must be registered with the police commissioner pursuant to section 10-304 of this chapter and must be kept at the unit's headquarters or some central place as registered. o. Nothing herein shall exempt a member of a unit of a war veterans organization from possessing a permit issued pursuant to section 10-303, to carry rifles or shotguns which are not the property of a war veterans organization; nor shall that member be exempt from registering such rifles or shotguns, pursuant to section 10-304, which said member may personally own, possess or purchase. p. Any gunsmith licensed pursuant to section 10-302 may engage in the business of gunsmith as authorized by such license. q. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter prohibiting the possession or disposition of assault weapons, a special theatrical dealer may possess such weapons exclusively for the purpose of leasing such weapons to special theatrical permittees within the city and for theatrical purposes outside the city and may, in addition, with the written approval of the commissioner, permanently remove one or more assault weapons from the city. § 10-306 Disposition, purchase and possession of ammunition and ammunition feeding devices. a. No person, except a dealer in rifles and shotguns, may dispose of to another person an ammunition feeding device which is designed for use in a rifle or shotgun and which is capable of holding more than five rounds of rifle or shotgun ammunition, except in the manner provided in this chapter for the disposition of assault weapons, provided that a person in lawful possession of such ammunition feeding devices may dispose of such ammunition feeding devices to a dealer in rifles and shotguns. No dealer in rifles and shotguns may dispose of such ammunition feeding devices except to a person who is exempt from subdivision a of section 10-303.1 pursuant to section 10-305. b. No person may possess an ammunition feeding device which is designed for use in a rifle or shotgun and which is capable of holding more than five rounds of rifle or shotgun ammunition, unless such person is exempt from subdivision a of section 10-303.1 pursuant to section 10-305, provided that a dealer in rifles and shotguns may possess such ammunition feeding devices for the purpose of disposition authorized pursuant to subdivision a of this section. c. No ammunition suitable for use in a rifle of any caliber or for any shotgun or ammunition feeding device which is designed for use in a rifle or shotgun and which is capable of holding no more than five rounds of rifle or shotgun ammunition shall be disposed of to any person who has not been issued a rifle and shotgun permit and a certificate of registration and who does not exhibit same to the dealer at the time of the purchase. In no event shall rifle or shotgun ammunition be disposed of to or possessed by any such person except for a shotgun, or for the specific caliber of rifle, for which the certificate of registration has been issued. No ammunition feeding device which is designed for use in a rifle or shotgun and which is capable of holding more than five rounds of rifle or shotgun ammunition shall be disposed of by a dealer in rifles and shotguns to any person who does not exhibit proof that he or she is exempt from subdivision a of section 10-303.1 pursuant to section 10-305. d. It shall be unlawful for any person who is required to have a permit in order to possess a rifle or shotgun and who has not been issued such permit to possess rifle or shotgun ammunition or an ammunition feeding device which is designed for use in a rifle or shotgun. e. A record shall be kept by the dealer of each disposition of ammunition or ammunition feeding devices under this section which shall show the type, caliber and quantity of ammunition or ammunition feeding devices disposed of, the name and address of the person receiving same, the caliber, make, model, manufacturer's name and serial number of the rifle or shotgun for which the purchaser is purchasing ammunition, the date and time of the transaction, and the number of the permit and certificate exhibited or description of the proof of exemption exhibited as required by this section. Such information shall be made available to all law enforcement agencies. f. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, ammunition and ammunition feeding devices which are designed for use in rifles or shotguns and which are capable of holding no more than five rounds of rifle or shotgun ammunition may be disposed of or possessed in the same manner and pursuant to the same requirements, rules and exemptions as apply to disposal or possession of rifles, shotguns or assault weapons under this chapter, provided that a special theatrical permittee may not possess live ammunition suitable for use in the rifle, shotgun or assault weapon such permittee is authorized to possess. Ammunition feeding devices which are designed for use in rifles or shotguns and which are capable of holding more than five rounds of rifle or shotgun ammunition may only be disposed of or possessed in the manner provided in this section. g. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any person authorized to possess a pistol or revolver within the city of New York may possess ammunition suitable for use in such pistol or revolver and a dealer in firearms or dealer in rifles and shotguns may dispose of such ammunition to such person pursuant to subdivision i of section 10-131. h. Dealers in rifles and shotguns and special theatrical dealers may lease ammunition feeding devices which are designed for use in rifles or shotguns to special theatrical permittees. Special theatrical permittees may possess such ammunition feeding devices subject to the same conditions as apply with respect to such permittee's possession of rifles, shotguns and assault weapons. § 10-307 Supply of forms. The commissioner shall provide all dealers in rifles and shotguns with adequate supplies of all forms including applications for permits as required by this chapter, without charge. § 10-308 Vehicles, rooms, dwellings or structures; possession therein. The presence of a rifle, or shotgun, or rifle or shotgun ammunition, in a vehicle, room, dwelling or structure, without a rifle and shotgun permit therefor and a certificate of registration therefor, or the presence of an assault weapon in a vehicle, room, dwelling or structure, shall be presumptive evidence of possession thereof by all persons occupying the vehicle, room, dwelling or structure at the time. § 10-309 Identifying marks. a. Defacing. Any person who alters, changes, removes, disfigures, obliterates or defaces the name of the maker, model, manufacturer's or serial number of a rifle, shotgun or assault weapon shall be in violation of this section. b. Any rifle or shotgun sold or otherwise disposed of by a licensed dealer, which does not contain a manufacturer's or serial number, must have imbedded into the metal portion of such rifle or shotgun a dealer's number. Failure to so mark and identify any rifle or shotgun shall be a violation of this section. § 10-310 Violation. Except as is otherwise provided in sections 10-302 and 10-303.1, violation of sections 10-301 through 10-309 and of rules and regulations issued by the commissioner pursuant thereto shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment of not more than one year or both, provided that the first violation of such sections involving possession of an unregistered rifle or shotgun or rifle or shotgun ammunition or an ammunition feeding device which is designed for use in a rifle or shotgun and which is capable of holding no more than five rounds of rifle or shotgun ammunition shall be an offense punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars or imprisonment of not more than fifteen days, or both on condition that (a) the first violation of possession of an unregistered rifle and shotgun or rifle and shotgun ammunition or an ammunition feeding device which is designed for use in a rifle or shotgun and which is capable of holding no more than five rounds of rifle or shotgun ammunition is not in conjunction with the commission of a crime and (b) the possessor has not been previously convicted of a felony or a serious offense and (c) the possessor has not previously applied for and been denied a permit for such possession. § 10-311 Sale of weapons without safety locking device prohibited. a. It shall be unlawful for any person or business enterprise to dispose of any weapon which does not contain a safety locking device. For the purposes of this section and section 10-312: (1) weapon shall mean a firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon, as such terms are defined in section 10-301; or a machine gun, as defined in the penal law; and (2) a safety locking device shall mean a design adaptation or attachable accessory that will prevent the use of the weapon by an unauthorized user, and includes, but is not limited to, a trigger lock, which prevents the pulling of the trigger without the use of a key, or a combination handle, which prevents the use of the weapon without the alignment of the combination tumblers. b. It shall be unlawful for any licensed manufacturer, licensed importer, or licensed dealer to dispose of any weapon in the city of New York unless it is accompanied by the following warning, which shall appear in conspicuous and legible type in capital letters, and which shall be printed on a label affixed to the weapon and on a separate sheet of paper included within the packaging enclosing the weapon: THE USE OF A LOCKING DEVICE OR SAFETY LOCK IS ONLY ONE ASPECT OF RESPONSIBLE WEAPON STORAGE. ALL WEAPONS SHOULD BE STORED UNLOADED AND LOCKED IN A LOCATION THAT IS BOTH SEPARATE FROM THEIR AMMUNITION AND INACCESSIBLE TO CHILDREN AND ANY OTHER UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS. NEW YORK CITY LAW PROHIBITS, WITH CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS, ANY PERSON FROM ACQUIRING MORE THAN ONE FIREARM, OR MORE THAN ONE RIFLE OR SHOTGUN, WITHIN A 90-DAY PERIOD. c. Any person who applies for and obtains authorization to purchase a weapon or otherwise lawfully obtains a weapon pursuant to chapters one or three of title ten of this code shall be required to purchase or obtain a safety locking device at the time he or she purchases or obtains the weapon. d. (1) The police commissioner is authorized to promulgate rules setting forth the types of safety locking devices which will comply with this section in accordance with subdivision a of this section. The city of New York and its agencies, officers or employees shall not be liable to any party by reason of any incident involving, or the use or misuse of, a safety locking device that may have been purchased in compliance with such rules promulgated by the commissioner. (2) The police commissioner shall provide written notice of the requirements of this section and section 10-312 to all persons who receive an official authorization to purchase a weapon and all persons applying for renewal of a license or permit issued pursuant to chapters one or three of title ten, including any rules promulgated under this subdivision. All persons applying for a license or permit or applying for the renewal of a license or permit pursuant to chapters one or three of title ten of this code, shall receive from the commissioner information concerning the importance of using a safety locking device while a weapon is not in use, and a warning that weapons should be stored unloaded and locked in a location that is both separate from their ammunition and inaccessible to children and any other unauthorized persons. e. Any violation of subdivisions a or b of this section or any rule promulgated thereunder shall be a misdemeanor and triable by a judge of the criminal court of the city of New York and punishable by imprisonment of not more than thirty days or by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both. § 10-312 Use of safety locking device required under certain circumstances. a. It shall be unlawful for any person who is the lawful owner or lawful custodian of a weapon, as that term is defined in section 10-311, to store or otherwise place or leave such weapon in such a manner or under circumstances that it is out of his or her immediate possession or control, without having rendered such weapon inoperable by employing a safety locking device. Any person who violates this subdivision shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by imprisonment of not more than ten days or by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars, or both. b. Any person who violates subdivision a of this section having previously been found guilty of a violation of such subdivision, or under circumstances which create a substantial risk of physical injury to another person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than thirty days or by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or both. c. The provisions of this section shall not apply to weapons owned or lawfully possessed by a police officer, as such term is defined in section 1.20 of the criminal procedure law, or a federal law enforcement officer, as such term is defined in section 2.15 of the criminal procedure law. § 10-313 Mandatory disclosure of gun violence information. Prior to issuing a license or permit for possession of a firearm, the department must provide applicants with the following statement in printed form:Warning: The presence of a firearm in the home is associated with an increased risk of suicide, death during domestic violence disputes, and unintentional deaths to children and others. § 10-314 Prohibition on unfinished frames or receivers. a. Restriction of possession. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no person shall dispose of or possess an unfinished frame or receiver. b. Penalties. The violation of this section constitutes a class A misdemeanor for each prohibited item disposed of or possessed. § 10-315 Times Square sensitive location zone. a. For the purposes of paragraph (t) of subdivision 2 of section 265.01- e of the penal law, the area commonly known as Times Square means and includes the following tract in Manhattan, bounded and described as follows: (i) BEGINNING at the point of intersection of the north side of West Forty-eighth Street and the west side of Ninth Avenue; (ii) thence southerly along the west side of Ninth Avenue to the point of intersection where the west side of Ninth Avenue meets the south side of West Fortieth Street; (iii) thence easterly along the south side of West Fortieth Street to the point of intersection where the south side of West Fortieth Street meets the east side of Sixth Avenue; (iv) thence northerly along the east side of Sixth Avenue to the point of intersection where the east side of Sixth Avenue meets the north side of West Fifty-third Street; (v) thence westerly along the northern side of West Fifty- third Street to the point of intersection where the north side of West Fifty- third Street meets the west side of Eighth Avenue; (vi) thence southerly along the west side of Eighth Avenue to the point of intersection where the west side of Eighth Avenue meets the north side of West Forty-eighth Street; and (vii) thence westerly along the north side of West Forty-eighth Street until the point of intersection where the north side of West Forty-eighth Street meets the west side of Ninth Avenue (the point of beginning). Where the area described in this subdivision is bounded and described by a side of a street or avenue, it shall be deemed to include the sidewalk of such side. For the purposes of paragraph (t) of subdivision 2 of section 265.01-e of the penal law, the area commonly known as Times Square does not include the interior of any building or other enclosed structure; provided, however, that such a building or structure may otherwise constitute a restricted or sensitive location pursuant to section 265.01-d or 265.01-e of the penal law. b. The police department shall promulgate such rules as may be necessary to implement subdivision a of this section in accordance with applicable law, including rules applicable, as appropriate, to persons with a firearms license who live or work in the area commonly known as Times Square as described in such subdivision. § 10-316 Firearm trafficking report. a. The mayor's office of criminal justice shall coordinate with the police department to conduct a study on reducing the flow of firearms into the city and shall submit a report to the mayor and the speaker of the council no later than December 1, 2022, and annually thereafter. Such study and report shall include the following information for the preceding calendar year: 1. For each firearm seized or surrendered in the city and obtained by the police department: (a) Whether the firearm was connected to a crime; (b) Where the firearm originated, including where it was first sold, manufactured, imported or assembled; (c) The date such firearm was seized or surrendered and the date such firearm was last sold legally; (d) The location of such seizure, including latitude and longitude if available, but in all cases at least as specific as the nearest intersection; (e) The type of such firearm; (f) The manufacturer or importer of such firearm; (g) Whether the firearm was a ghost gun or a firearm created using a three-dimensional printer, and if so, the entities that produced such firearm or parts thereof; (h) The dealer of such firearm and whether such dealer was licensed; and (i) Whether the firearm was registered in any registry, including the national firearms registration and transfer record. 2. A review of the ways firearms are illegally transported into the city, including through roadways on and connected to interstate 95 and sea ports or bodies of water; 3. A review of the ways states and municipalities collaborate to prevent illegal transportation of firearms, and recommendations to strengthen such collaboration, including: (a) Recommendations for strengthening collaboration between the mayor's office of criminal justice, the police department, the bureau of alcohol, tobacco, firearms and explosives and other relevant state and federal agencies; (b) Recommendations for strengthening law enforcement's ability to trace firearms, including whether increased microstamping would be feasible and effective; (c) Recommendations for implementing a shared electronic tracking system to identify dealers who have sold a particular firearm; and (d) Examining the value of establishing a firearm dealer code of conduct, including recommendations for provisions that should be included in such dealer code of conduct; 4. Recommendations for policies to prevent access to firearms by individuals who are likely to harm themselves or others; 5. Recommendations for youth-related programs to discourage the use of firearms by minors; 6. Recommendations for crime prevention through environmental design improvements, including additional lighting in public spaces; and 7. Impediments to reporting additional relevant data related to illegal firearms, including any legal restrictions on such reporting or the use of such data for such reporting. b. Limitations on disclosure. If disclosure of any information specified in paragraph one of subdivision a of this section is prohibited by law, such study and report shall identify the information being withheld and the reason therefor, and shall, instead of such withheld information, include aggregate data to the extent available. Such study and report need not include information about any firearm obtained through a gun buy-back program or where disclosure would compromise the safety of the public or police officers or could otherwise compromise law enforcement investigations or operations. Such report shall include the total number of seizures for which reporting was withheld due to a pending criminal investigation, and upon completion of such investigations the information relating to such seizures shall be reflected in a subsequent report. Chapter 4: Actions by Victims of Violent Crime § 10-401 Short title. This local law shall be known as the Victims of Violent Crime Protection Act. § 10-402 Definition. For purposes of this chapter: a. Crime of violence means an act or series of acts that would constitute a misdemeanor or felony against the person as defined in state or federal law or that would constitute a misdemeanor or felony against property as defined in state or federal law if the conduct presents a serious risk of physical injury to another, whether or not those acts have actually resulted in criminal charges, prosecution, or conviction. § 10-403 Civil cause of action. Except as otherwise provided by law, any person claiming to be injured by an individual who commits a crime of violence as defined in section 10-402 of this chapter, shall have a cause of action against such individual in any court of competent jurisdiction for any or all of the following relief: 1. compensatory and punitive damages; 2. injunctive and declaratory relief; 3. attorneys' fees and costs; 4. such other relief as a court may deem appropriate. § 10-404 Limitations. a. A civil action under this chapter must be commenced within six years after the alleged crime of violence as defined in section 10-402 of this chapter occurred. If, however, due to injury or disability resulting from an act or acts giving rise to a cause of action under this chapter, or due to infancy as defined in the civil procedure law and rules, a person entitled to commence an action under this chapter is unable to do so at the time such cause of action accrues, then the time within which the action must be commenced shall be extended to six years after the inability to commence the action ceases. b. Nothing in this section requires a prior criminal complaint, prosecution or conviction to establish the elements of a cause of action under this chapter. § 10-405 Burden of proof. Conviction of a crime arising out of the same transaction, occurrence or event giving rise to a cause of action under this chapter shall be considered conclusive proof of the underlying facts of that crime for purposes of an action brought under this chapter. That such crime was a crime of violence must be proved by preponderance of the evidence. § 10-406 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this local law is, for any reason, declared unconstitutional or invalid, in whole or in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction such portion shall be deemed severable, and such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this law, which remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect. Chapter 5: Disclosure of Security Breach § 10-501 Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, a. The term personal information shall mean any information concerning an individual that because of a name, number, symbol, mark or other identifier, can be used to identify that individual. b. The term private information shall mean either: (i) personal information consisting of any information in combination with any one or more of the following data elements, when either the data element alone or the combination of such information plus the data element is not encrypted, or encrypted with an encryption key that has also been accessed or acquired: (1) social security number; (2) driver's license number or non-driver identification card number; (3) account number, credit or debit card number, in combination with any required security code, access code, password or other information which would permit access to an individual's financial account; (4) account number, or credit or debit card number, if circumstances exist wherein such number could be used to access an individual's financial account without additional identifying information, security code, access code, or password; or (5) biometric information, meaning data generated by electronic measurements of an individual's unique physical characteristics, such as a retina or iris scan, fingerprint, voiceprint, or scan of hand or face geometry, any of which is collected, retained, converted, stored or shared to identify an individual; or (ii) a user name or e-mail address in combination with a password or security question and answer that would permit access to an online account. Private information does not include publicly available information that is lawfully made available to the general public from federal, state, or local government records. c. The term breach of security shall mean the unauthorized access, acquisition, disclosure or use of computerized data that compromises the security, confidentiality or integrity of private information maintained by an agency. Good faith or inadvertent access, acquisition, disclosure, or use of any private information by an employee or agent of an agency for the legitimate purposes of the agency, and good faith or legally mandated disclosure of any private information by an employee or agent of an agency for the legitimate purposes of the agency shall not constitute a breach of security, but in such instances an agency must comply with the protocols issued pursuant to subdivision i of section 10-502. d. The term consumer reporting agency shall mean any person that, for monetary fees, dues, or on a cooperative nonprofit basis, regularly engages in whole or in part in the practice of assembling or evaluating consumer credit information or other information on consumers for the purpose of furnishing consumer reports to third parties, and uses any means or facility of interstate commerce for the purpose of preparing or furnishing consumer reports. § 10-502 Agency disclosure of a breach of security. a. Any city agency that owns, leases, or licenses data that includes private information shall promptly disclose to the chief privacy officer, office of cyber command and department of information technology and telecommunications any breach of security following discovery by a supervisor or manager, or following notification to a supervisor or manager, of such breach if such private information was, or is reasonably believed to have been, accessed, acquired, disclosed, or used by an unauthorized person. b. Subsequent to compliance with the provisions set forth in subdivision a of this section, any city agency that owns, leases, or licenses data that includes private information shall disclose, in accordance with the procedures set forth in subdivisions d, e and f of this section, any breach of security following discovery by a supervisor or manager, or following notification to a supervisor or manager, of such breach to any individual whose private information was, or is reasonably believed to have been, accessed, acquired, disclosed, or used by an unauthorized person. c. Any city agency that maintains but does not own, lease, or license data that includes private information shall disclose any breach of security following discovery by a supervisor or manager, or following notification to a supervisor or manager, of such breach to the owner, lessor or licensor of the data if the private information was, or is reasonably believed to have been, accessed, acquired, disclosed, or used by an unauthorized person. d. The disclosures required by subdivisions b and c of this section shall be made as soon as practicable by a method reasonable under the circumstances, provided said method is not inconsistent with the legitimate needs of law enforcement or any other investigative or protective measures necessary to restore the integrity of the data system. Disclosures required by subdivision b of this section shall be made to each affected individual by at least one of the following means: 1. Written notice; or 2. Telephonic notification, provided that a log of each such notification is maintained by the agency that notifies the affected individuals; or 3. Electronic notification, provided that the affected individual has expressly consented to receiving such notification in electronic form and a log of each such notification is maintained by the agency that notifies affected individuals in such form; provided further, however, that in no case shall any city agency, individual, or business require an individual to consent to accepting notification in such form as a condition of establishing any relationship or engaging in any transaction. e. Should disclosure pursuant to paragraph one, two or three of subdivision d be impracticable or inappropriate given the circumstances of the breach and the identity of the victim, such disclosure shall be made by a mechanism that is reasonably targeted to the individual in a manner that does not further compromise the integrity of the private information. f. In the event that five thousand or more New York residents are to be notified at one time pursuant to this section, the agency shall also notify consumer reporting agencies as to the timing, content and distribution of the notices and approximate number of affected individuals. Such notice shall be made without delaying notice to affected New York residents. g. Notice to affected individuals under this section is not required if the exposure of private information was an inadvertent disclosure by persons authorized to access private information, and the agency reasonably determines, in accordance with the protocols established pursuant to subdivision i of this section, that such exposure will not likely result in misuse of such information, or financial, personal, or reputational harm to the affected individuals. Such a determination must be documented in writing and maintained for at least five years. h. If notice of a breach of security is made to affected individuals pursuant to any law or rule of the state of New York, or pursuant to a law described in paragraph b of subdivision 2 of section 208 of the state technology law, nothing in this section shall require any additional notice to those affected individuals, but notice still shall be provided pursuant to subdivision a of this section. i. The office of cyber command, in consultation with the chief privacy officer and the department of information technology and telecommunications, shall issue protocols for agency coordination and recordkeeping for any breach of security and any incident that is not a breach of security but involves the good faith or inadvertent access, acquisition, disclosure, or use of any private information by an employee or agent of an agency for the legitimate purposes of the agency. Such protocols may apply to all agencies or a subset thereof. j. Notifications made pursuant to this section may overlap with notifications required pursuant to chapter 12 of title 23, including the regulations, policies and protocols issued by the chief privacy officer pursuant to such chapter. Nothing in this section or such chapter shall require duplicate notifications, as long as any notice provided meets any applicable requirements of both this law and such chapter. § 10-503 Agency disposal of private information. An agency that discards records containing any individual's private information shall do so in a manner intended to prevent retrieval of the information contained therein or thereon. § 10-504 Agency disposal of electronics. a. Any agency that disposes of electronic equipment that contains a hard disk drive, solid state drive or similar device capable of storing information while powered off, including but not limited to printers, copiers and computers, shall ensure, before its disposal, the erasure of all information contained therein, either through degaussing, physical destruction of the drive, a data wiping that includes at least two full overwrites or another erasure method specified by the department of information technology and telecommunications after consultation with all relevant agencies. This requirement shall not apply to boot related firmware. b. Each agency shall require any third party who disposes of electronic equipment on its behalf to provide the agency a written certification that the disposal complies with the requirements set forth in this section and shall forward such certification to the department of information technology and telecommunications. Every two years each agency that has disposed of electronic equipment itself shall submit a statement to the department of information technology and telecommunications certifying that its disposal of such electronic equipment complies with the requirements set forth in this section. c. For the purposes of this section, the term dispose includes a transfer of electronic equipment from one agency to another when such equipment has stored information that is confidential or sensitive in nature and is not relevant to the work of the agency receiving such equipment. Chapter 6: Gun Offender Registration Act § 10-601 Short title. This local law shall be known as the Gun Offender Registration Act. § 10-602 Definitions. For purposes of this chapter: a. Career education shall have the meaning given in subdivision twenty- four of section two of the education law. b. Commissioner shall mean the police commissioner of the city of New York or his or her designee. c. Department shall mean the police department of the city of New York. d. Gun offender shall mean any person who is convicted, after the effective date of this act, of a gun offense as defined in subdivision e of this section in a court in the city of New York. Convictions that result from or are connected with the same act, or result from offenses committed at the same time, shall be counted for the purpose of this chapter as one conviction. The entry of a plea of guilty, a plea of guilty where the gun offender does not accept responsibility, a plea of nolo contendere, or a verdict of guilty, shall constitute a conviction for purposes of this chapter; provided, however, that any conviction set aside pursuant to law, including any conviction for a gun offense that has been reversed upon appeal, is not a conviction for purposes of this chapter. The term gun offender shall not include any person who has been pardoned for all gun offenses by the governor. e. Gun offense shall mean a conviction of criminal possession of a weapon in the third degree in violation of subdivision 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 of section 265.02 of the penal law or criminal possession of a weapon in the second degree in violation of subdivision 3 of section 265.03 of the penal law. f. Higher education shall have the meaning given in subdivision eight of section two of the education law. g. Local correctional facility shall have the meaning given in paragraph (a) of subdivision sixteen of section two of the correction law. h. Secondary education shall have the meaning given in subdivision seven of section two of the education law. i. State correctional facility shall mean a correctional facility as defined in paragraph (a) of subdivision four of section two of the correction law. § 10-603 Duty to register and to verify. a. A gun offender shall register with the department at the time sentence is imposed on a form prescribed by the department. b. Registration as required by this chapter shall consist of a statement in writing signed by the gun offender giving such information as may be required under subdivision c of this section. c. A gun offender shall, to the extent required by the department, provide the following information to the department: 1. The gun offender's name, all aliases used, date of birth, sex, race, height, weight, eye color, number of any driver's license or non-driver photo ID card, home address and/or expected place of residence. 2. A photograph, updated during the period of registration as described in subdivision d of this section. 3. A description of the offense for which the gun offender was convicted, the date of conviction and the sentence imposed. 4. The name and address of any institution of career education, higher education or secondary education at which the gun offender is or expects to be enrolled or attending, and whether such offender resides in or will reside in a facility owned or operated by such institution. 5. The gun offender's expected place of employment, including name and phone number of supervisor and mailing address of employer. 6. Any other information deemed pertinent by the department. d. First personal appearance. A gun offender who is required to register shall personally appear at such office as the commissioner may direct within forty-eight hours of (i) release, in the event the gun offender receives a sentence of imprisonment, or (ii) the time sentence is imposed, if such sentence does not include imprisonment, for the purpose of personally verifying such information as may be required under subdivision c of this section with the department. The department may at such time photograph the gun offender. The commissioner may require the gun offender to provide such documentation as the commissioner deems acceptable verifying such information. e. For a gun offender who is required to register under this chapter and who is a resident of the City of New York, every six months after the gun offender's initial registration date during the period in which he or she is required to register under this chapter the following applies: 1. Except as specified in paragraph 2 of this subdivision, within twenty days of each six month anniversary of the gun offender's initial registration date, the gun offender shall personally appear at such office as the commissioner may direct for the purpose of verifying such information as may be required under subdivision c of this section with the department. The department may at such time photograph the gun offender. The commissioner may require the gun offender to provide such documentation as the commissioner deems acceptable verifying such information. 2. If a gun offender required to register under this chapter who is a resident of the City of New York is confined to any state or local correctional facility, hospital or institution throughout the twenty-day period described in paragraph 1 of this subdivision, such gun offender shall personally appear as required by paragraph 1 within forty-eight hours of release. The department may at such time photograph the gun offender. f. The department is authorized to maintain in the registry database information other than that specified in subdivision c of this section. g. Any gun offender shall, within ten calendar days after establishing residence in the city of New York or changing residences within the city of New York, personally appear at such office as the commissioner may direct and there provide verification information as required by this chapter. The commissioner may require the gun offender to provide such documentation as the commissioner deems acceptable verifying the change in residence. § 10-604 Duration of registration and verification. A gun offender shall register and verify for a period of four years from the date of conviction of a gun offense, if the conviction does not include imprisonment, or for a period of four years from the date of release after conviction of a gun offense, in the event the gun offender receives a sentence of imprisonment. § 10-605 Sharing of registration information. The department is authorized to make the registry available to any regional or national government-operated registry of gun offenders for the purpose of sharing information. The department may accept files from any regional or national registry of gun offenders. The department is also authorized to make the registry available to other City agencies. § 10-606 Cooperation with other agencies. The department is authorized to cooperate with state and City agencies and the judiciary to facilitate implementation of this chapter. Assistance and cooperation in the implementation of this chapter shall be provided by other City departments and agencies upon request by the commissioner. § 10-607 Regulations. The commissioner may make and promulgate such rules and regulations and establish such forms as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. § 10-608 Penalties. Any violation by a gun offender of this chapter or of rules and regulations established pursuant to this chapter, including any failure to register or to verify pursuant in the manner and within the time periods provided for in this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment of not more than one year or both. Failure to receive any form shall not excuse any violation of this chapter. Chapter 7: Unauthorized Recording in a Place of Public Performance § 10-701 Definitions. Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: a. Recording device means a photographic or video camera, or any audio and/or visual recording function of any device used for recording or transmitting sound, picture, or both, of a live performance or motion picture. b. Place of public performance means (1) a theater that is used primarily for the exhibition of motion pictures or (2) any venue that is used for the exhibition of motion pictures or used for live theatrical or musical performances at which the operator posts a sign that meets the requirements of section 10-705 of this article. c. Unauthorized operation means operation conducted without written authority or permission from the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of a place of public performance. § 10-702 Unauthorized operation of a recording device in a place of public performance prohibited. No person may engage in or cause or permit another to engage in the unauthorized operation of a recording device in a place of public performance. § 10-703 Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which, upon a first conviction, shall be punishable by a term of imprisonment not to exceed six months, by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars nor more than five thousand dollars, or both such fine and imprisonment, and be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which, upon a second and any subsequent conviction occurring within one year of a first conviction, shall be punishable by a term of imprisonment not to exceed one year, by a fine of not less than five thousand dollars nor more than ten thousand dollars, or both such fine and imprisonment, and be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed ten thousand dollars. Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties or sanctions that may be imposed, and such penalties shall not limit or preclude any cause of action available to any person or entity injured or aggrieved by such action. § 10-704 Exception. This section shall not be interpreted to impair or restrict any law enforcement personnel or employees of governmental agencies or other entities, public or private, who, in the course of their employment, attempt to capture any visual image, sound recording, or other physical impression: (i) of a person engaging in criminal or otherwise illegal activity; or (ii) while conducting an investigation, surveillance, or monitoring of any person to obtain evidence of suspected illegal activity, including the suspected violation of any administrative rule or regulation, a suspected fraudulent insurance claim, or any other suspected fraudulent conduct or activity involving a violation of law or pattern of business practices adversely affecting public health or safety. § 10-705 Signage. The operator of a venue as defined by paragraph (2) of subdivision b of  10-701 of this subchapter may prominently display at the entrance to such venue, a sign stating in conspicuous letters that are at least three-fourths of an inch high that the unauthorized operation of a recording device at such place of public performance is prohibited by law and is punishable by criminal and civil penalties. § 10-706 Rule-making authority. The police department may promulgate rules as necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Chapter 8: Silver Alert System § 10-801 Definitions. a. Administering agency shall mean any city agency, office, department, division, bureau or institution of government, the expenses of which are paid in whole or in part from the city treasury, as the mayor shall designate. b. Silver alert shall mean the communication to the public by a city agency of identifying information concerning a vulnerable senior who is reported missing to a law enforcement agency under circumstances indicating that the person is in imminent danger of serious bodily harm or death. c. Vulnerable senior shall mean a person who is sixty-five years of age or older with dementia, as a result of Alzheimer's disease or a similar condition. § 10-802 Silver alert system. The administering agency shall establish a silver alert system, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter of the code, that will provide rapid notification to the public when a vulnerable senior is reported missing under circumstances indicating that the person is in imminent danger of serious bodily harm or death. § 10-803 Procedures. a. The administering agency shall develop a protocol for notification to organizations such as media organizations, senior service providers, medical facilities and community organizations when a silver alert is issued. b. The administering agency shall, as appropriate, consult with other city agencies, including, but not limited to, the police department, the fire department, the office of emergency management, the human resources administration, the department for the aging, the department of health and mental hygiene and the department of transportation, to collect and disseminate information regarding the person for whom the silver alert was issued. c. The administering agency shall issue a silver alert within twenty-four hours of the determination that a vulnerable senior has been reported missing under circumstances indicating that the person is in imminent danger of serious bodily harm or death. The silver alert may be issued by any appropriate means, including, but not limited to, email notifications, text messages, telephone calls, television broadcasts or radio broadcasts. The silver alert may be issued at repeated intervals within the discretion of the administering agency until such missing person is found or until the administering agency determines that the issuance of a silver alert is no longer appropriate. d. The information about the person for whom the silver alert was issued, if available and capable of transmission, shall include, but not be limited to: (1) the person's name; (2) the person's age; (3) a physical description of the person; (4) the last known location where the person was seen, which shall not include the exact address of the person's home; (5) a recent photograph of the person; and (6) a description of any motor vehicle the person may have been driving, provided that the administering agency may refrain from disclosing any such information if disclosure is inappropriate under the circumstances. e. The administering agency may use its discretion to issue a silver alert for a person under the age of 65 who is reported missing under circumstances indicating that the person is in imminent danger of serious bodily harm or death, where such missing person has dementia, as a result of Alzheimer's disease or a similar condition. Chapter 9: Hit-and-Run Alert § 10-901 Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Administering agency. The term administering agency means any city agency, office, department, division, bureau or institution of government, the expenses of which are paid in whole or in part from the city treasury, as the mayor designates. Hit-and-run. The term hit-and-run means when any driver who, knowing or having cause to know that serious physical injury has been caused to another person due to an incident involving the driver's motor vehicle, leaves the scene of an incident without complying with all of the provisions of paragraph a of subdivision two of section six hundred of the vehicle and traffic law. Serious physical injury. The term serious physical injury has the same meaning as in section 10.00 of the penal law. § 10-902 Hit-and-run alert system. a. The administering agency shall establish a hit-and-run alert system, pursuant to the provisions of this section, to provide rapid notification to the public when a hit-and-run involving serious physical injury or death occurs. b. The administering agency shall develop a protocol for notification to organizations such as media organizations, medical facilities and community organizations when a hit-and-run alert is issued. c. The administering agency shall issue a hit-and-run alert within 24 hours of the determination that a hit-and-run involving serious physical injury or death occurred, provided the perpetrator involved in such incident has not been located, and that sufficient information about the perpetrator of the hit- and-run incident or the subject motor vehicle is available to the administering agency. The administering agency may use its discretion to refrain from issuing such alert if the alert is inappropriate under the circumstances or would compromise a law enforcement investigation. The hit-and-run alert may be issued by any appropriate means, including, but not limited to, email notifications, text messages, telephone calls, television broadcasts, or radio broadcasts. The hit-and-run alert may be issued at repeated intervals within the discretion of the administering agency until the perpetrator involved in such hit-and-run has been located or until the administering agency determines that the issuance of a hit-and-run alert is no longer appropriate. Chapter 10: Prevention of Interference with Reproductive Health Services. §10-1001 This chapter has been renumbered as 21-189 et seq. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the access to reproductive health care facilities law. § 10-1002 Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Person. The term person means an individual, corporation, not-for-profit organization, partnership, association, group or any other entity. Premises of a reproductive health care facility. The term premises of a reproductive health care facility means the driveway, entrance, entryway, or exit of a reproductive health care facility and the building in which such facility is located and any parking lot in which the facility has an ownership or leasehold interest. Reproductive health care facility. The term reproductive health care facility means any building, structure or place, or any portion thereof, at which licensed, certified or otherwise legally authorized persons provide health care services or health care counseling relating to the human reproductive system. § 10-1003 Prohibition of activities to prevent access to reproductive health care facilities. a. Unlawful conduct. It is unlawful for any person: 1. To knowingly physically obstruct or block another person from entering into or exiting from the premises of a reproductive health care facility by physically striking, shoving, restraining, grabbing, or otherwise subjecting a person to unwanted physical contact, or attempting to do the same; 2. To knowingly obstruct or block the premises of a reproductive health care facility, so as to impede access to or from the facility, or to attempt to do the same; 3. To follow and harass another person within 15 feet of the premises of a reproductive health care facility; 4. To engage in a course of conduct or repeatedly commit acts within 15 feet of the premises of a reproductive health care facility when such behavior places another person in reasonable fear of physical harm, or to attempt to do the same; 5. To physically damage a reproductive health care facility so as to interfere with its operation, or to attempt to do the same; or 6. To knowingly interfere with the operation of a reproductive health care facility, or to attempt to do the same, by activities that include, but are not limited to, interfering with, or attempting to interfere with (i) medical procedures being performed at such facility or (ii) the delivery of goods to such facility. b. Violations. Any person who violates any provision of subdivision a of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, for a first conviction under this section. For a second and each subsequent conviction under this section, the penalty shall be a fine not to exceed $5,000 or imprisonment not to exceed one year, or both. § 10-1004 Civil cause of action. Where there has been a violation of subdivision a of section 10-1003, any person whose ability to access a reproductive health care facility has been interfered with, and any owner or operator of a reproductive health care facility or owner of a building in which such a facility is located, may bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for any or all of the following relief: a. Injunctive relief; b. Treble the amount of actual damages suffered as a result of such violation, including, where applicable, damages for pain and suffering and emotional distress, or damages in the amount of $5,000, whichever is greater; and c. Attorney's fees and costs. § 10-1005 Civil action by city to enjoin interference with access to reproductive health care facilities. The corporation counsel may bring a civil action on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive and other appropriate equitable relief in order to prevent or cure a violation of subdivision a of section 10-1003. § 10-1006 Joint and several liability. If it is found, in any action brought pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, that two or more of the named defendants acted in concert pursuant to a common plan or design to violate any provision of subdivision a of section 10-1003, such defendants shall be held jointly and severally liable for any fines or penalties imposed or any damages awarded. § 10-1007 Construction. a. This chapter does not limit the right of any person or entity to seek other available criminal penalties or civil remedies. The penalties and remedies provided under this chapter are cumulative and are not exclusive. b. This chapter does not prohibit expression protected by the first amendment of the constitution of the United States or section 8 of article 1 of the constitution of the state of New York. c. This chapter does not limit the lawful exercise of any authority vested in the owner or operator of a reproductive health care facility, the owner of the premises in which such a facility is located, or a law enforcement officer of the city, the state of New York or the United States acting within the scope of such person's official duties. Chapter 11: Actions by Victims of Gender-Motivated Violence. § 10-1101 Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Victims of Gender- Motivated Violence Protection Law. § 10-1102 Declaration of legislative findings and intent. Gender-motivated violence inflicts serious physical, psychological, emotional and economic harm on its victims. Congressional findings have documented that gender-motivated violence is widespread throughout the United States, representing the leading cause of injuries to women ages 15 to 44. Further statistics have shown that three out of four women will be the victim of a violent crime sometime during their lives, and as many as 4,000,000 women a year are victims of domestic violence. Senate hearings, various task forces and the United States department of justice have concluded that victims of gender- motivated violence frequently face a climate of condescension, indifference and hostility in the court system and have documented the legal system's hostility towards sexual assault and domestic violence claims. Recognizing this widespread problem, congress in 1994 provided victims of gender-motivated violence with a cause of action in federal court through the violence against women act (VAWA) (section 13981 of title 42 of the United States code). In a May 15, 2000, decision, the United States supreme court held that the constitution provided no basis for a federal cause of action by victims of gender-motivated violence against perpetrators of offenses committed against them either under the commerce clause or the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment. In so ruling, the court held that it could think of no better example of the police power, which the Founders denied the National Government and reposed in the States, than the suppression of violent crime and vindication of its victims. § 10-1103 Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Crime of violence. The term crime of violence means an act or series of acts that would constitute a misdemeanor or felony against the person as defined in state or federal law or that would constitute a misdemeanor or felony against property as defined in state or federal law if the conduct presents a serious risk of physical injury to another, whether or not those acts have actually resulted in criminal charges, prosecution, or conviction. Crime of violence motivated by gender. The term crime of violence motivated by gender means a crime of violence committed because of gender or on the basis of gender, and due, at least in part, to an animus based on the victim's gender. § 10-1104 Civil cause of action. Except as otherwise provided by law, any person claiming to be injured by a party who commits, directs, enables, participates in, or conspires in the commission of a crime of violence motivated by gender has a cause of action against such party in any court of competent jurisdiction for any or all of the following relief: a. Compensatory and punitive damages; b. Injunctive and declaratory relief; c. Attorney's fees and costs; and d. Such other relief as a court may deem appropriate. § 10-1105 Limitations. a. A civil action under this chapter shall be commenced within seven years after the alleged crime of violence motivated by gender occurred. If, however, due to injury or disability resulting from an act or acts giving rise to a cause of action under this chapter, or due to infancy as defined in the civil procedure law and rules, a person entitled to commence an action under this chapter is unable to do so at the time such cause of action accrues, then the time within which the action must be commenced shall be extended to nine years after the inability to commence the action ceases. Notwithstanding any provision of law that imposes a period of limitation to the contrary, any civil claim or cause of action brought under this chapter that is barred because the applicable period of limitation has expired is hereby revived and may be commenced not earlier than six months after, and not later than two years and six months after, September 1, 2022. b. Except as otherwise permitted by law, nothing in this chapter entitles a person to a cause of action for random acts of violence unrelated to gender or for acts that cannot be demonstrated, by preponderance of the evidence, to be a crime of violence motivated by gender. c. Nothing in this section requires a prior criminal complaint, prosecution or conviction to establish the elements of a cause of action under this chapter. § 10-1106 Burden of proof. Conviction of a crime arising out of the same transaction, occurrence or event giving rise to a cause of action under this chapter is conclusive proof of the underlying facts of that crime for purposes of an action brought under this chapter. That such crime was a crime of violence motivated by gender must be proved by a preponderance of the evidence. § 10-1107 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this chapter is, for any reason, declared unconstitutional or invalid, in whole or in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable, and such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this law, which remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect. 

Title 20: Consumer and Worker Protection Chapter 1: License Enforcement § 20-101 Legislative intent. The council finds that for the protection and relief of the public from deceptive, unfair and unconscionable practices, for the maintenance of standards of integrity, honesty and fair dealing among persons and organizations engaging in licensed activities, for the protection of the health and safety of the people of New York city and for other purposes requisite to promoting the general welfare, licensing by the department of consumer and worker protection is a necessary and proper mode of regulation with respect to certain trades, businesses and industries. The council finds further that, in order to secure the above-mentioned purposes, and generally to carry out responsibilities for supervising and regulating licensed activities, trades, businesses and industries, the commissioner of consumer and worker protection requires powers, remedies and sanctions which are equitable, flexible and efficient. Finally, the council finds that sanctions and penalties applied by the commissioner and by the courts for the violation of laws and regulations by individuals and organizations engaging in various licensed activities, trades, businesses and industries, must be sufficient to achieve these above-mentioned purposes of licensing. § 20-102 Definitions. Wherever used in this title: a. Commissioner shall mean the commissioner of consumer and worker protection. b. Department shall mean the department of consumer and worker protection. c. License shall mean an authorization by the department of consumer and worker protection to carry on various activities within its jurisdiction, which may take the form of a license, permit, registration, certification or such other form as is designated under law, regulation or rule. d. Organization shall mean a business entity, including but not limited to a corporation, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, association, firm, club or society. e. Person shall mean a natural person or an organization. f. Trade name shall mean that name under which an organization or person solicits, engages in, conducts or transacts a business or activity. § 20-103 Construction of this chapter and chapter two of this title. The provisions of this chapter and chapter two of this title shall be liberally construed in accordance with the legislative declaration of the city council set forth in section 20-101. § 20-104 Powers of the commissioner with respect to licensing. a. The commissioner shall have cognizance and control of the granting, issuance, transferring, renewal, denial, revocation, suspension and cancellation of all licenses issued under chapter two and under all other laws conferring such powers upon him or her. The commissioner or the commissioner's designee shall collect all fees for all such licenses and permits and shall otherwise enforce the provisions of chapter two. b. The commissioner shall, as he or she determines necessary and appropriate, promulgate, amend and rescind regulations and rules: 1. to carry out the powers and duties of the department; 2. to prevent and remedy fraud, misrepresentation, deceit and unconscionable dealing, and to promote fair trade practices by those engaging in licensed activities; 3. to require adequate disclosure by those engaging in licensed activities of both the terms and conditions under which they perform licensed activities, adequate disclosure of the true names or true corporate names of licensees, and adequate disclosure of applicable local, state and federal law pertinent to consumers' interests regarding the conduct of activities licensed under chapter two; 4. to require that licensees keep such records as he or she may determine are necessary or useful for carrying out the purposes of chapter two and, except as specifically set forth in chapter two, retain them for three years; 5. to ensure that all persons and organizations licensed under this title have made appropriate financial disclosure, and that the premises complies with all legal requirements necessary to engage in the licensed activity; 6. with respect to licensed activities, to protect the health, safety, convenience and welfare of the general public; and 7. to ensure that those engaging in licensed activities do not discriminate against any person on the basis of age, sex, race, color, national origin, creed or religion in violation of city, state or federal laws. c. The commissioner shall compile all regulations and rules promulgated by the department and maintain a copy thereof, available for public inspection at his or her principal office at such times as that office shall be open for business. A record of each license issued indicating its kind and class, the license number, the fee received therefor and such other records as the commissioner may require shall be kept by the department. d. The commissioner or the commissioner's designee shall be authorized to conduct investigations, to issue subpoenas, to receive evidence, to hear complaints regarding activities for which a license is or may be required, to take depositions on due notice, to serve interrogatories, to hold public and private hearings upon due notice, to take testimony and to promulgate, amend and modify procedures and practices governing such proceedings. e. (1) The commissioner shall be authorized, upon due notice and hearing, to suspend, revoke or cancel any license issued by him or her in accordance with the provisions of chapter two and to impose or institute fines or civil penalties for the violation of (i) any of the provisions of chapter two of this title and regulations and rules promulgated under chapter two of this title and (ii) any of the provisions of any other law, rule or regulation, the enforcement of which is within the jurisdiction of the department including but not limited to subchapter one of chapter five of this title (the consumer protection law) subchapter two of chapter five (the truth in-pricing-law); provided that such violation is committed in the course of and is related to the conduct of the business, trade or occupation which is required to be licensed pursuant to chapter two of this title. Except to the extent that dollar limits are otherwise specifically provided such fines or civil penalties shall not exceed five hundred dollars for each violation. (2) The commissioner may arrange for the redress of injuries caused by such violations, and may otherwise provide for compliance with the provisions and purposes of chapter two of this title. (3) The commissioner or the commissioner's designee shall be authorized to suspend the license of any person pending payment of such fine or civil penalty or pending compliance with any other lawful order of the department. (4) The commissioner shall be authorized to impose a fine or civil penalty or to suspend a license or both for a failure to appear at a hearing at the department after due notice of such hearing. If a license has been suspended, it shall be returned to the department forthwith upon receipt of the order of suspension. Failure to surrender the license shall be grounds for a fine or civil penalty or revocation of the license. (5) Any of the remedies provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided under any other provision of law. f. The commissioner, upon due notice and hearing, may require that persons licensed under chapter two of this title who have committed repeated, multiple or persistent violations of chapter two or any other law, rule or regulation the enforcement of which is within the jurisdiction of the department, conspicuously display at their place of business and in advertisements a notice (of a form, content and size to be specified by the commissioner), which shall describe the person's record of such violations; provided that, for each time such display is required, the commissioner may require that such notice be displayed for not less than ten nor more than one hundred days. g. The commissioner may refuse to issue or renew any license issued in accordance with the provisions of chapter two of this title and may suspend or revoke any such license, after due notice and opportunity to be heard, upon the occurrence of any one or more of the following conditions: 1. Two or more judgments within a two-year period against the applicant or licensee for theft of identity as defined in section three hundred eighty- s of the general business law; or 2. One criminal conviction against the applicant or licensee for acts of identity theft or unlawful possession of personal identification information as defined in article one hundred ninety of the penal law; or 3. Two or more criminal convictions within a two-year period of any employees or associates of the applicant or licensee for acts of identity theft or unlawful possession of personal identification information as defined in article one hundred ninety of the penal law that are committed with the use of the applicant's or licensee's equipment, data, technology, or other similar resource. It shall be an affirmative defense that a applicant or licensee did not have reasonable grounds to believe the proscribed acts were taking place with the use of the licensee's equipment, data, technology, or other similar resource or that the proscribed acts were not taking place with the use of the applicant's or licensee's equipment, data, technology, or other similar resource. § 20-105 Additional powers of the commissioner with respect to unlicensed activities. a. It shall be unlawful for any person required to be licensed pursuant to the provisions of chapter two or pursuant to provisions of state law enforced by the department to engage in any trade, business or activity for which a license is required without such license. b. In addition to the enforcement procedures set forth in section 20-106 of this chapter and chapter two of this title the commissioner upon due notice and hearing shall be authorized: 1. to impose fines upon any person in violation of subdivision a of this section of one hundred dollars per violation per day for each and every day during which such person violates such subdivision, with each day constituting a distinct and independent violation. Except as otherwise expressly provided in chapter two of this title, fines imposed pursuant to this paragraph shall be in addition to, and shall not be offset or modified by, any fines or civil penalties prescribed by chapter two of this title. 2. to order any person in violation of subdivision a of this section immediately to discontinue such activity at the premises on which such activity is occurring. 3. to order that such premises on which such activity is occurring be sealed, provided that such premises are primarily used for such activity. 4. to order that any devices, items or goods sold, offered for sale available for public use or utilized in the operation of a business and relating to such activity for which a license is required but has not been obtained pursuant to the provisions of chapter two shall be removed, sealed or otherwise made inoperable. c. Orders of the commissioner issued pursuant to this subdivision shall be posted at the premises on which unlicensed activity occurs in violation of this section. d. Orders of the commissioner issued pursuant to paragraph two, three or four of subdivision b of this section shall be stayed with respect to any person who, prior to service of the notice provided in subdivision b of this section, had submitted a full and complete application in proper form and accompanied by the requisite fee for a license or the renewal of a license while such application is pending. e. Ten days after the posting of an order issued pursuant to paragraph two, three or four of subdivision b of this section and upon the written directive of the commissioner, officers and employees of the department and officers of the New York city police department are authorized to act upon and enforce such orders. f. Any devices, items or goods removed pursuant to the provisions of subdivision b of this section shall be stored in a garage, pound or other place of safety and the owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of such devices, items, or goods may be charged with reasonable costs for removal and storage payable prior to the release of such devices, items or goods to such owner or such other person. g. The commissioner shall order that any premises which are sealed pursuant to this section shall be unsealed and that any devices, items or goods removed, sealed or otherwise made inoperable pursuant to this section shall be released, unsealed or made operable upon: 1. payment of all outstanding fines and all reasonable costs for removal and storage, and 2. presentation of proof that a license has been obtained for such activity or, if such person or premises are for any reason ineligible to obtain a license, proof satisfactory to the commissioner that such premises, devices, items or goods will not be used in violation of this section. h. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to remove the seal on any premises or remove the seal or make operable any devices, items or goods sealed or otherwise made inoperable in accordance with an order of the commissioner. i. The owner or other person lawfully entitled to reclaim the devices, items or goods removed pursuant to this section shall reclaim such devices, items or goods. If such owner or such other person does not reclaim such devices, items or goods within ninety days of their removal, such devices, items or goods shall be subject to forfeiture upon notice and judicial determination in accordance with provisions of law. Upon forfeiture the department shall, upon a public notice of at least five days, sell such forfeited devices, items or goods at public sale. The net proceeds of such sale, after deduction of the lawful expenses incurred, shall be paid into the general fund of the city. j. In the event that any removal made pursuant to this section shall include any perishable items, goods or food products which cannot be retained in custody without such items, goods or food products becoming unwholesome, putrid, decomposed or unfit in any way, they may be delivered to the commissioner of health for disposition pursuant to the provisions of section 17-323 of this code. k. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply to general vendors required to be licensed pursuant to subchapter twenty-seven of chapter two of this title. § 20-106 Judicial enforcement. a. Except as otherwise specifically provided in chapter two of this title, or in subdivision b of this section, any person, whether or not he or she holds a license issued under chapter two, who violates any provision of chapter two or any regulation or rule promulgated under it shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished for each violation by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars nor more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding fifteen days, or both; and any such person shall be subject also to a civil penalty in the sum of one hundred dollars for each violation, to be recovered in a civil action. b. Any person who engages without a license therefor in an activity for which a license is required by any provision of chapter two, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the following sanctions: 1. If he or she has never held a license for such activity, he or she shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars, nor more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding fifteen days, or both; and any such person shall be subject also to the payment of a civil penalty in the sum of the greater of twice the applicable license fee or one hundred dollars, to be recovered in a civil action. 2. If he or she has never held a license for such activity, and has been convicted once previously for engaging in such activity without a license, or if he or she has held such license and his or her license has lapsed prior to such person's perfecting an application for a renewal, he or she shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty days, or both; and he or she shall be subject also to civil penalty in the sum of one thousand dollars, to be recovered in a civil action. 3. If such person has held such a license, but his or her license has been suspended or revoked, or he or she has twice previously been convicted of engaging in such activity without a license, he or she shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred dollars nor more than two thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding sixty days, or both; and he or she shall be subject also to a civil penalty in the sum of two thousand dollars, to be recovered in a civil action. c. Every manager or proprietor of a business required to be licensed under chapter two who consents to, causes or allows that business to operate without a license and every person aiding such unlicensed business and every owner or lessee of any building, part of building, grounds, room or place, who leases or lets the premises for the operation of any unlicensed business or assents that the premises be used for any such purpose, is in violation of this title and shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred dollars per day for every day during which the unlicensed business operates. This penalty shall be prosecuted, sued for and recovered in the name of the city. d. The corporation counsel is authorized to bring an injunction proceeding to restrain or enjoin any violation of this title. § 20-107 Application; filing fee; license fee. a. All applications for licenses shall be made to the commissioner or the commissioner's designee in such form and detail as shall be prescribed. b. Every application for a license or the renewal of an existing license shall provide an opportunity for the applicant to indicate the language in which he or she would prefer that inspections in connection with such license be conducted. Nothing in this subdivision nor any failure to comply with such preference shall be construed so as to create a cause of action or constitute a defense in any legal, administrative, or other proceeding. c. Except as specifically provided in chapter two, every application shall include the license fee for the full license term. If the license is not issued, the lesser of fifty dollars or one-half of the amount of the annual license fee shall be retained by the department as a non-returnable filing fee. In the event a license is issued for less than the full license term, the applicable fee shall be decreased proportionately to the nearest half year, except that in no case shall the fee be less than the fee for one-half year. Where a two year license is surrendered for a reason other than suspension or revocation and less than one year of the license term has expired, the licensee may apply for a refund of an amount equal to one year's license fee. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in chapter two, reference to fees, license fees or any other word of similar import shall be deemed to be the license fee for one year. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this section, whenever the commissioner increases or decreases the term of a type of license pursuant to section 20-108 of this chapter, the fee for such license shall be increased or decreased proportionately and the amount of refund due upon surrender of such license before the expiration of the term for a reason other than suspension or revocation shall be prorated to the unexpired term. § 20-108 License terms. a. The commissioner shall establish by regulation the expiration date of licenses issued pursuant to chapter two. b. Licenses issued pursuant to chapter two shall be for a two-year term unless otherwise specifically provided for in chapter two; provided, however, that whenever the commissioner changes the expiration date of a type of license pursuant to subdivision a of this section, he or she may also increase or decrease the term of such type of license by rule to the extent necessary to effectuate the change. § 20-109 Transferability. No license issued under chapter two shall be assignable or transferable unless otherwise specifically provided by law or regulation or rule issued by the commissioner. § 20-110 Change of corporate ownership. Where any person or organization becomes the beneficial owner of ten percent or more of the stock of an organization to which a license has been granted pursuant to chapter two, if such person or organization previously did not hold at least a ten percent interest, such license shall immediately become void unless prior written approval of the commissioner or the commissioner's designee is obtained. § 20-111 Change in a partnership. Any license issued under chapter two shall immediately become void upon the addition or termination of any general partner or upon the dissolution of a partnership unless prior written approval of the commissioner or the commissioner's designee is obtained. § 20-112 Address of licensed activity. Except as specifically provided in chapter two, a license shall be valid only for the location designated upon the application therefor, except in the case of licenses issued for activities which in their nature are carried out at large and not at a fixed place of business. No license shall be issued for more than one location. Licensees shall, at least ten days prior thereto, notify the commissioner or the commissioner's designee by registered or certified mail, or personal service, of any change of address of the licensed premises or of the residence of the licensee. § 20-113 Trade name. A license issued under chapter two shall be valid only for activities conducted under the name of the person or organization to whom such license was issued or under the trade name stated in the application therefor; if a licensed activity is to be conducted under a trade name, the application must state that trade name. No license shall be issued for more than one trade name, and no licensed activity may be carried out under more than one such name; provided, however, that if a person or organization was engaged in bona fide licensed activities under more than one such trade name or was issued a license to conduct licensed activities under more than one trade name prior to June fifth, nineteen hundred seventy-three, a single license shall be issued for such trade names. Licensees shall notify the commissioner or the commissioner's designee of any change of trade name at least ten days before such change becomes effective, and no such change may take place without the prior written approval of the commissioner or the commissioner's designee. § 20-114 Inspection; display of license. a. All licensed vehicles or places of business shall be regularly inspected, and reports thereof shall be made to the commissioner. b. All licensees shall conspicuously post on their premises, licenses issued under chapter two and said licenses shall be accessible at all times for inspection by any interested person. Licensees having no fixed place of business shall exhibit their licenses upon the request of any interested person. § 20-115 Bonds. Except as specifically provided in chapter two, a bond may be required for any licensed activity in a form and amount approved by the commissioner for the due observance of the provisions of chapter two and the laws, regulations and rules governing the conduct of licensed activities. The amount of the bond shall be established by the commissioner after a public hearing, five-day notice of which shall be published in the City Record. § 20-116 Advertising. a. Any person required to be licensed under chapter two or pursuant to provisions of state law enforced by the department to carry on a trade, occupation or business activity, who is not so licensed may not advertise the availability of goods and services related to the carrying on of such trade, occupation or business activity in any print publication or broadcast media having a circulation or audience within the city. b. The commissioner after notice and hearing shall be authorized to impose civil penalties upon any person found to have violated subdivision a of this section. Such penalties shall be levied for each broadcast of such advertisement and shall be not less than fifty dollars nor more than two hundred fifty dollars for each violation. Such penalties for printed advertisements shall be determined based on the period of time the publication in which the advertisement appears remains current. The current period shall be determined as that time when a publication is initially offered for sale until the period when the next dated publication is offered for sale. In no case shall this period be less than twenty-four hours. If the current period is: daily, such penalty shall be not less than fifty dollars nor more than one hundred dollars per day; weekly, such penalty shall be not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than three hundred fifty dollars per week; greater than one week and not more than one month, such penalty shall be not less than three hundred fifty dollars nor more than five hundred dollars; greater than one month, such penalty shall be not less than five hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars. Such civil penalties may be recovered in a civil action before any court having jurisdiction of such actions. c. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations requiring that any person required to be licensed under this title or pursuant to provisions of state law enforced by the department shall state in all print advertising with respect to such licensed activity the license number, and that the activity is licensed by the department. § 20-117 Licensee disclosure of breach of security, notification requirements. Any person who is required to be licensed pursuant to chapter two of this title or pursuant to provisions of state law enforced by the department, and who is also required to make a notification pursuant to subdivision 2 or 3 of section 899-aa of the general business law, shall promptly submit a copy of such notification to the department. Such notice shall be made without delaying notice to any individual whose private information was, or is reasonably believed to have been, accessed, acquired, disclosed, or used by an unauthorized person.§ 20-118 Notifications regarding identity theft repealed. § 20-119 Penalties. a. Except as otherwise provided in this section and this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of: (i) one hundred seventy-five dollars for the first violation; (ii) three hundred dollars for the second violation committed; and (iii) five hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent violation committed. b. Any person who violates section 1-21 of title 6 of the rules of the city of New York, or any successor to such provision, shall be subject to a civil penalty of five hundred dollars. Chapter 2: Licenses Subchapter 1: Tobacco Retail Dealers. § 20-201 Definitions. Whenever used in this subchapter: Agent. The term agent means any person authorized to purchase and affix adhesive or meter stamps under chapter 13 of title 11 who is designated as an agent by the commissioner of finance. Cigarette. The term cigarette means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco or any other substance, irrespective of size or shape and whether or not such tobacco or substance is flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, the wrapper or cover of which is made of paper or any other substance or material but is not made in whole or in part of tobacco. Commissioner of finance. The term commissioner of finance means the commissioner of finance of the city. Community district. The term community district means a community district established pursuant to chapter 69 of the charter. Community district retail dealer cap. The term community district retail dealer cap means the maximum number of retail dealers permitted to obtain a license to sell cigarettes or tobacco products within a community district. Dealer. The term dealer means any wholesale dealer or retail dealer as hereinafter defined. Good standing. The term good standing means any retail dealer that has not been found to have violated subdivision a of section 20-202, subdivision a or b of section 11-1303, section 17-703, section 17-703.2, subdivision a of section 17-704, subdivision a of section 17-704.1, section 17-705, subdivision a or b of section 17-706 or section 17-715 on more than one day during the previous three consecutive years. Person. Notwithstanding sections 1-112 and 20-102 of the code, the term person means any individual, partnership, society, association, joint-stock company, corporation, limited liability company, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee or any other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of individuals. Pharmacy. The term pharmacy means pharmacy as defined in subdivision 1 of section 6802 of the education law, and any retail store that contains a pharmacy. Retail dealer. The term retail dealer means any person, other than a wholesale dealer, engaged in selling cigarettes or tobacco products. For the purposes of this chapter, the possession or transportation at any one time of more than 400 cigarettes or little cigars, or more than 50 cigars, or more than one pound of loose tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snus or shisha, or any combination thereof, by any person other than a manufacturer, an agent, a licensed wholesale dealer or a person delivering cigarettes or tobacco products in the regular course of business for a manufacturer, an agent or a licensed wholesale or retail dealer, shall be presumptive evidence that such person is a retail dealer. Retail store. The term retail store means any place that, in the regular course of business, sells or rents goods directly to the public. Sale or purchase. The term sale or purchase means any transfer of title or possession or both, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever or any agreement therefor. Tobacco product. The term tobacco product means tobacco product as defined in section 17-702. Wholesale dealer. The term wholesale dealer means any person who sells cigarettes to retail dealers or other persons for purposes of resale only, and any person who owns, operates or maintains one or more cigarette vending machines in, at or upon premises owned or occupied by any other person. § 20-202 License. a. License required of retail dealers. 1. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a retail dealer without first having obtained a license as hereinafter prescribed for each place of business wherein such person sells cigarettes or tobacco products in the city. 2. It shall be unlawful for a person to permit any premises under such person's control to be used by any other person in violation of paragraph 1 of subdivision a of this section. 3. It shall be unlawful for a pharmacy to obtain a license to engage in business as a retail dealer. b. License application. In order to obtain a license to engage in business as a retail dealer, a person shall file an application with the commissioner for a license for each place of business that he or she desires to have for the retail sale of cigarettes or tobacco products in the city. The application for each license or renewal thereof shall be made upon such form as prescribed by the commissioner and shall contain such information as the commissioner shall require. c. Fee and license term. 1. There shall be a biennial fee of $200 for a license to engage in the business of a retail dealer at each place of business where cigarettes or tobacco products are sold in the city. 2. All even-numbered licenses shall expire on December 31 of the even- numbered year, and all odd-numbered licenses shall expire on December 31 of the odd-numbered year, next succeeding the year in which the license is issued. d. Issuance of license. 1. A license shall be issued to a person to conduct the business of a retail dealer for each place of business where such person engages in selling cigarettes or tobacco products in the city only where: (A) an applicant for a license or renewal thereof meets all the requirements prescribed herein and any criteria in addition thereto established by the commissioner by rule as he or she deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter; (B) an applicant satisfies the commissioner that such person is fit and able to conduct the business of a retail dealer; (C) the commissioner has not received notification from the commissioner of finance or the commissioner of the department of health and mental hygiene that such applicant is not in full compliance with any provisions of chapter 13 or chapter 40 of title 11 of this code relating to the sale of cigarettes or tobacco products, section 17-176 or section 17-176.1 or chapter 7 of title 17, or any rules promulgated by the commissioner of finance or the commissioner of the department of health and mental hygiene to effectuate the purposes of such chapters; and (D) the number of licenses in the community district in which the place of business of such applicant is located is lower than the community district retail dealer cap. 2. A retail dealer license shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for the persons in whose names it is issued and for the transaction of business in the place designated therein and shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the place for which it is issued. 3. Where a license for any place of business licensed pursuant to this subchapter has been revoked, the commissioner shall refuse to issue a license required under this subchapter for such place of business, unless the applicant for such license demonstrates with documentary proof, to the satisfaction of the commissioner, that the applicant acquired the premises or business through an arm's length transaction and that the applicant neither: (A) shared in the ownership, or otherwise exercised control over the management, of the original licensee; nor (B) employs any person who shared in the ownership, or otherwise exercised control over the management, of the original licensee. 4. For purposes of revocation of retail dealer licenses pursuant to section 17-710, any violation of section 17-703, section 17-703.2, subdivision a of 17-704, subdivision a of section 17-704.1, section 17-705 or subdivision a or b of section 17-706, or, for purposes of suspension of retail dealer licenses pursuant to section 17-716, any violation of section 17-715, by any license holder at a place of business shall be included in determining the number of violations by any subsequent license holder at the same place of business unless the subsequent license holder provides the commissioner with adequate documentation demonstrating that the subsequent license holder acquired the premises or business through an arm's length transaction and that the sale or lease was not conducted, in whole or in part, for the purpose of permitting the original licensee to avoid the effect of violations on the premises and that the subsequent license holder neither: (A) shared in the ownership, or otherwise exercised control over the management, of the original licensee; nor (B) employs any person who shared in the ownership, or otherwise exercised control over the management, of the original licensee. 5. For purposes of paragraphs 3 and 4 of this subdivision, arm's length transaction means a sale of a fee or all undivided interests in real property, or lease of any part thereof, or a sale of a business, in good faith and for valuable consideration, that reflects the fair market value of such real property or lease, or business, in the open market, between two informed and willing parties, where neither is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction, unaffected by any unusual conditions indicating a reasonable possibility that the sale or lease was made for the purpose of permitting the original licensee to avoid the effect of violations on the premises. The following sales or leases shall be presumed not to be arm's length transactions unless adequate documentation is provided demonstrating that the sale or lease was not conducted, in whole or in part, for the purpose of permitting the original licensee to avoid the effect of violations on the premises: (1) a sale between relatives; or (2) a sale between related companies or partners in a business; or (3) a sale or lease affected by other facts or circumstances that would indicate that the sale or lease is entered into for the primary purpose of permitting the original licensee to avoid the effect of violations on the premises, or revocation of a license, such as a sale or lease entered into while there are violations pending against the original licensee that could result in revocation or suspension of the license. e. Community district retail dealer cap. 1. The commissioner shall establish a community district retail dealer cap for each community district in the city. The initial community district retail dealer cap shall be 50 percent of the total number of licenses issued to retail dealers in the community district, exclusive of the number of licenses issued to retail dealers that are pharmacies, on the effective date of the local law that added this subdivision, as determined by the department. 2. The department, in conjunction with the department of health and mental hygiene, shall evaluate community district retail dealer caps every two years and any time community district boundaries change. Such evaluation shall include consideration of the number of retail dealers and the prevalence of cigarette smoking and use of other tobacco products. If, based on the evaluation, the department of health and mental hygiene recommends further reductions to the community district retail dealer cap, the department of health and mental hygiene shall advise the speaker of the city council of such recommendations. 3. The commissioner may promulgate rules governing the application process related to the issuance of new licenses after the establishment of a community district retail dealer cap. 4. Exceptions for certain licenses. Notwithstanding subparagraph (D) of paragraph 1 of subdivision d, if: (A) a license of a retail dealer expires at the end of the license term, such retail dealer may apply for renewal of such license; (B) a business whose owner has been issued a retail dealer license is sold, the succeeding owner may apply for a license for use at the same location, provided that the retail dealer selling such business was in good standing at the time of such sale, and the application is received within thirty days of the applicable change of ownership; (C) a retail dealer license becomes void pursuant to section 20-110, the succeeding beneficial owners of 10 percent or more of the stock of the organization to which a license had been granted may apply for a license, provided that such retail dealer was in good standing at the time the license became void, and the application is received within thirty days of the change of ownership; and (D) a retail dealer license becomes void pursuant to section 20-111, the succeeding partnership may apply for a license, provided that such retail dealer was in good standing at the time the license became void and the application is received within thirty days of the change of ownership. § 20-203 Recordkeeping and examination. a. A retail dealer shall make and maintain such records of cigarette sales and purchases as are prescribed by the commissioner of finance pursuant to chapter thirteen of title eleven of this code. b. Such records as are required to be kept shall be available for inspection at the place of business for which a retail dealer license is issued and such records shall be available for inspection by the commissioner of finance or such commissioner's duly authorized representatives as to the extent necessary to ascertain whether such retail dealer is in compliance with the purposes and requirements of chapter thirteen of title eleven of this code. § 20-204 Duplicate licenses. Whenever any license issued under the provisions of this subchapter is defaced, destroyed or lost, the commissioner shall issue a duplicate license to the holder of the defaced, destroyed or lost license upon the payment of a fee of fifteen dollars. § 20-205 Prohibited sales and purchases. No agent or dealer shall sell cigarettes to an unlicensed dealer, or to a dealer whose license has been suspended or revoked. No dealer shall purchase cigarettes from any person other than a manufacturer or a licensed wholesale dealer. § 20-206 Renewal, suspension and revocation of licenses. a. In addition to any other powers of the commissioner, and not in limitation thereof, the commissioner may, after due notice and opportunity to be heard, refuse to renew any license required under this subchapter and may suspend or revoke such license if the person holding such license, or, where applicable, any of its officers, principals, directors, members, managers, employees, or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation, has been found to have: 1. made a material false statement or concealed a material fact in connection with the filing of any application pursuant to this subchapter; or 2. not paid, within the time permitted by law, any civil penalty or judgment duly imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder or pursuant to chapter thirteen of title eleven of this code, or chapter forty of title eleven of this code relating to cigarette sales; or 3. violated the provisions of subdivision a or b of section 17-706 of this code or any rules promulgated thereunder; or 4. violated any provision of section 10-203 of this code or any rules promulgated thereunder. b. In addition to the commissioner's power to refuse to renew, suspend or revoke a license as provided in subdivision a of this section, the commissioner shall be authorized to refuse to renew any license required under this subchapter and may suspend or revoke such license upon the notification by the commissioner of finance that the person holding such license, or, where applicable, any of its officers, principals, directors, employees, members, managers, or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation, has been found to have violated any provision of chapter thirteen of title eleven of this code, or of chapter forty of title eleven of this code relating to cigarette sales. c. Upon suspending or revoking any retail cigarette license, the commissioner shall direct the holder thereof to surrender to the commissioner immediately any cigarette retail license or duplicates thereof issued to such holder for such place of business and the holder shall surrender promptly all such licenses to the commissioner as directed. § 20-207 Violations. a. The civil penalties imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other sanctions and orders which may be imposed by the commissioner pursuant to this title including, but not limited to, such sanctions and orders which may be imposed pursuant to section 20-105 or to title 11 or title 17 of this code or pursuant to such other law the commissioner is authorized to enforce under this code. The civil penalties imposed pursuant to this section for a violation of subdivision a of section 20-202 shall be in lieu of the civil penalties imposed pursuant to section 17-703 of this code, and the civil penalties imposed pursuant to this section for a violation of section 20-205 shall be in lieu of the civil penalties imposed pursuant to subdivision b of section 17-703.2 of this code. b. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision a and b of section 20-106 of this code, any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than two hundred and fifty dollars but not more than two thousand dollars for each violation, to be recovered in a civil action or in an administrative tribunal with jurisdiction. c. The commissioner, after providing notice and an opportunity to be heard, shall be authorized to order the sealing of any premises where any person has been found: 1. to have engaged in unlicensed activities in violation of this subchapter on at least two occasions within a three-year period; or 2. to have violated any of subdivision a of section 17-704, section 17-705, subdivision a or b of section 17-706 or section 17-715 on at least three occasions within a three-year period. Subchapter 3: Amusement Devices, Arcades and Operators. Renumbered as chapt. 4 subsection 3-a. § 20-211 Definitions. Renumbered as 20-626. § 20-212 Licenses required. repealed. § 20-213 Fees repealed. § 20-214 License requirements renumbered as 20-067. § 20-215 Gambling, gambling devices not authorized. Renumbered as 20-628. § 20-216 Location of player-operated amusement devices and prohibition on minors entering certain premises where located. Renumbered as 20-629. Subchapter 4: Billiard and Pocket Billiard Tables and Billiard and Pocket Billiard Rooms repealed. § 20-215 License; general provisions. Repealed. § 20-216 Definitions. Repealed. § 20-217 Prohibitions. Repealed. § 20-218 Fees; term. Repealed. § 20-219 Exemptions. Repealed. § 20-220 Regulations. Repealed. § 20-221 Application of subchapter. Repealed. Subchapter 6: Sidewalk Cafes Repealed. § 20-223 Definitions. Repealed. § 20-224 License required. Repealed. § 20-225 Review and approval of petitions for revocable consents to construct and operate enclosed sidewalk cafes which do not require special permits. Repealed. § 20-226 Review and approval of petitions for revocable consents to operate unenclosed sidewalk cafes which do not require special permits. Repealed. § 20-227 Review and approval of petitions for revocable consents to construct and operate sidewalk cafes which require special permits. Repealed. § 20-227.1 Violations and penalties. Repealed. § 20-227.2 Temporary sidewalk cafe authorization. Repealed. Subchapter 7: Sidewalk Stands § 20-228 Definitions. Whenever used in this subchapter, the following shall mean: a. Newsstand. A not readily removable stand or booth operated primarily for the sale of newspapers and periodicals. b. Area occupied. The sidewalk space occupied when a newsstand is in operation including any space occupied by the stand itself, including racks, tables, doors or anything which prevents ordinary use of the sidewalks. c. Franchise. A franchise granted pursuant to chapter fourteen of the city charter to construct, install and maintain newsstands in the city of New York. For purposes of this subchapter, the date upon which a franchise is granted shall be the date on which such franchise is registered in accordance with chapter fourteen of the city charter. d. Franchisee. A person granted a franchise. e. Replacement newsstand. Either (i) a newsstand that replaces a newsstand at the same location, provided that the license pursuant to section 20-229 of this code for the newsstand that is being replaced is in full force and effect on the date such franchise is granted, or (ii) a newsstand constructed and installed at any location approved by the department of transportation to replace a newsstand that the city requires, for any reason, to be permanently removed from the location for which it is licensed, provided such license is in full force and effect at the time removal is required. f. Stoop line stand. A stand or booth operated on a sidewalk for the sale or display of the articles enumerated in subdivision b of section 20-233 of this subchapter, which shall be subject to the restrictions and requirements of sections 20-233 through 20-241.1 of this subchapter. g. Dependent child. A child or stepchild who is financially dependent on a parent or guardian. § 20-229 License required. a. No person shall operate a newsstand or newsstands unless licensed pursuant to this subchapter, and unless such person has no other income, excluding investment income, which exceeds the income such person earns from the operation of the newsstand or newsstands; provided, however, that if such person is a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other association, each shareholder of such corporation, each partner of such partnership, each member of such limited liability company or each principal of such other association, respectively, shall have no other income, excluding investment income, which exceeds the income such shareholder, partner, member or principal earns from the operation of such newsstand or newsstands. No license shall be issued to a person for the operation of a newsstand that is not a replacement newsstand and that has been constructed and installed by a franchisee pursuant to a franchise unless such operator has reimbursed such franchisee for the costs of construction and installation of such newsstand as determined by the department in accordance with paragraph two of subdivision c of section 20-241 of the code. b. 1. No person shall be issued more than two licenses to operate a newsstand pursuant to this subchapter. 2. For purposes of determining the number of licenses held by a person pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision, the following provisions shall apply: (a) A natural person shall be deemed to hold the license issued in the name of such natural person's dependent child, a partnership in which such natural person is a partner, a corporation in which such natural person is an officer, director or shareholder, or a limited liability company in which such natural person is a member, manager or officer. (b) A corporation shall be deemed to hold the license issued in the name of: (1) An officer, director or shareholder of such corporation; (2) Another corporation where such corporation and such other corporation share a common officer, director or shareholder, or such corporation or any of its officers, directors or shareholders has any direct or indirect interest in such other corporation; (3) A limited liability company where such corporation or any of its officers, directors or shareholders is a member, manager or officer of such limited liability company, or such corporation or any of its officers, directors or shareholders has any direct or indirect interest in such limited liability company; or (4) A partnership where such corporation or any of its officers, directors or shareholders is a partner in such partnership, or such corporation or any of its officers, directors or shareholders has any direct or indirect interest in such partnership. (c) A limited liability company shall be deemed to hold the license issued in the name of; (1) A member, manager or officer of such limited liability company; (2) Another limited liability company where such limited liability company and such other limited liability company share a common member, manager or officer, or such limited liability company or any of its members, managers or officers has any direct or indirect interest in such other limited liability company; (3) A corporation where such limited liability company or any of its members, managers or officers is an officer, director or shareholder in such corporation or such limited liability company or any of its members, managers or officers has any direct or indirect interest in such corporation; or (4) A partnership where such limited liability company or any of its members, managers or officers is a partner in such partnership, or such limited liability company or any of its members, managers or officers has any direct or indirect interest in such partnership. (d) A partnership shall be deemed to hold the license in the name of: (1) A partner of such partnership; (2) Another partnership where such partnership is a partner in such other partnership, such partnership and such other partnership share a common partner, or such partnership or any of its partners has any direct or indirect interest in such other partnership; (3) A corporation where such partnership or any of its partners is an officer, director or shareholder in such corporation, or such partnership or any of its partners has any direct or indirect interest in such corporation; or (4) A limited liability company where such partnership or any of its partners is a member, manager or officer in such limited liability company, or such partnership or any of its partners has any direct or indirect interest in such limited liability company. c. No person applying for or holding a newsstand license shall rent or attempt to rent the newsstand to another person. § 20-230 Preferences; employment; fee. a. When there are competing applications for a certain location, a preference in granting a license shall be shown as follows: 1. Disabled veterans; 2. Handicapped persons as defined by the department; 3. Veterans who are not disabled; 4. Persons over the age of sixty-two. b. The biennial fee for a license to operate a newsstand shall be one thousand seventy-six dollars. § 20-231 Restrictions; size. a. No newsstand shall be within three feet of private property without the consent of the owner of that property. b. Items other than newspapers, magazines, periodicals, and prepaid telecommunication or transit cards may be offered for sale from a newsstand if they are sold for less than ten dollars exclusive of taxes; provided, however, that apparel, jewelry, hair ornaments, handbags and video cassettes shall not be offered for sale from a newsstand and that if food items are offered for sale, they must be prepackaged. c. No new license shall be issued under section 20-229 unless approval for the location has been obtained from the department of transportation. d. 1. No license issued under section 20-229 shall be renewed if the department of transportation determines that the newsstand so licensed poses an obstruction to the free use of sidewalks by pedestrians at the time of review. 2. On and after the effective date of the local law that adds this paragraph two to this subdivision d of this section, a newsstand shall not be eligible for a renewal if the area of the sidewalk occupied by it exceeds seventy-two square feet or such newsstand exceeds nine feet in height. (a) On and after such date, such newsstand that was first licensed on or after the first day of August, nineteen hundred ninety-one shall not pose an obstruction to the free use of the sidewalks by pedestrians if the location of such newsstand does not (i) reduce the area maintained on the sidewalk for pedestrian movement below a width of nine and one-half feet. (ii) place the proposed newsstand within five feet of a fire hydrant. (iii) create a level of service at the proposed location for the peak fifteen minutes of the peak hour of a pedestrian flow rate equal to or greater than eleven people per minute per linear foot of clear path, as determined by the department of transportation. (iv) place the proposed newsstand within fifteen feet of an entrance to or exit from a subway. (v) extend into the area encompassed by the extension of the property lines from the buildings to the curb at the intersection of two streets and the area ten feet on either side of such lines. (vi) extend into a bus stop. (vii) otherwise create a hazardous condition. For purposes of this subparagraph, a hazardous condition shall include, but not be limited to, the location of a newsstand less than one foot, six inches from the curb, under a fire escape, within ten feet of a driveway or parking lot or within two feet from underground access points, such as utility access openings, ventilation grills, or cellar doors. (b) On and after such date, a newsstand that was first licensed prior to the first day of August, nineteen hundred ninety-one shall not pose an obstruction to the free use of the sidewalks by pedestrians if the location of such newsstand does not (i) reduce the area maintained on the sidewalk for pedestrian movement below a width of nine and one-half feet. (ii) place the proposed newsstand within five feet of a fire hydrant. (iii) create a level of service at the proposed location for the peak fifteen minutes of the peak hour of a pedestrian flow rate equal to or greater than eleven people per minute per linear foot of clear path, as determined by the department of transportation. (iv) violate the restrictions on the location of newsstands in subdivision f of this section, if such newsstand is located at the rear or side of a subway entrance or exit kiosk. (v) extend into the area encompassed by the extension of the property lines from the buildings to the curb at the intersection of two streets. (vi) otherwise create a hazardous condition. For purposes of this subparagraph, a hazardous condition shall include, but not be limited to, the location of a newsstand less than one foot, six inches from the curb, under a fire escape, within ten feet of a driveway or parking lot or within two feet from underground access points, such as utility access openings, ventilation grills, or cellar doors. e. No newsstand shall occupy an area of more than seventy-two square feet or have a height of over nine feet. However, any newsstand that occupied an area of more than seventy-two square feet on the first day of August, nineteen hundred seventy-nine may continue to operate within that area until the thirty- first day of July, nineteen hundred eighty. In no event shall there be less than a width of nine and one-half feet maintained on the sidewalk for pedestrian movement. The provision of this section requiring that no less than nine and one-half feet be maintained on the sidewalk for pedestrian movement shall not apply to any newsstand which was first licensed by the department prior to the first day of August, nineteen hundred seventy-nine where the person who held the license for such newsstand on the first day of August, nineteen hundred ninety-one continues to be the licensee for such newsstand; provided, however, that where a newsstand which was first licensed prior to the first day of August, nineteen hundred seventy-nine is reconstructed in its entirety or in substantial part, which reconstruction was commenced on or after the first day of August, nineteen hundred ninety-one, such newsstand shall be subject to such requirement that no less than nine and one-half feet be maintained on the sidewalk for pedestrian movement. f. Stands at subway entrance or exit kiosks shall be maintained at the rear or side of such kiosks. Where such stand is located at the rear of such entrance or exit it shall not be located within fifteen feet of the front of any other entrance or exit and shall not be longer than the width of the kiosk nor occupy an area of more than fifty square feet. g. It shall be unlawful to erect a stand or booth under the stairs of an elevated railway station, or a projection therefrom, which is wider than the width of the stairs or which extends along the sidewalk a greater distance than to a point where the undersurface is not over seven feet from the level of the sidewalk. h. 1. After November first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine, no newsstand may be operated unless its design has been approved by the art commission. The art commission shall evaluate newsstand designs in conformity with guidelines to be established by the department. Approval or disapproval of a design submission shall be issued within thirty days of filing an application with the commission. 2. The department of transportation shall develop criteria for the design of the interior of newsstands constructed and installed by a franchisee pursuant to a franchise in consultation with available representatives of newsstand licensees and available representatives of publishers. i. No advertising shall be placed on any newsstand other than exterior advertising placed by a franchisee. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or limit the ability of the newsstand licensee to display legal merchandise pursuant to rules promulgated by the department. j. The licensee shall make reasonable efforts to maintain the cleanliness of his or her newsstand. Such requirement shall not include an obligation to maintain the exterior of a structure installed pursuant to a franchise. The licensee shall make no alteration in the design or dimensions of a newsstand constructed or installed by a franchisee. k. 1. On and after the grant of a franchise, no new license shall be granted except for operation of a newsstand installed and maintained pursuant to such franchise, and approval of the location of a new newsstand shall be made by the department of transportation in accordance with rules of the department. 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or the second undesignated paragraph of section 15-205 of the code, a newsstand, the location or dimensions of which were not in violation of the provisions of this section or any rule promulgated pursuant thereto at the date of the grant of a franchise and which complies with all of the terms and conditions of such franchise, may be reconstructed at such location by such franchisee if such reconstruction does not change the location of such newsstand or expand the area occupied by such newsstand for any reason, including compliance with the requirements of any provision of law in effect at the time of such reconstruction, such as the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. If such reconstruction results in a change in location or an expansion of the area occupied by such newsstand, such newsstand may be reconstructed at such changed or expanded location if that location complies with the siting criteria applicable to the renewal of the license of such newsstand in subparagraph (a) or (b) of paragraph two of subdivision d of this section. If such reconstruction at such location would not comply with such criteria, such newsstand may be relocated in accordance with the process defined in paragraph five of this subdivision to a location that meets the criteria in subparagraph (a) of such paragraph two. 3. On or after the grant of such franchise, any newsstand applying for renewal of a license issued pursuant to section 20-229 of this subchapter may remain at its then current location if it meets the siting criteria applicable to the renewal of the license of such newsstand in subparagraph (a) or (b) of paragraph two of subdivision d of this section, or, if such location does not meet such criteria, such newsstand may be relocated in accordance with the process defined in paragraph five of this subdivision to a location that meets the criteria in subparagraph (a) of such paragraph two. 4. On or after the grant of such franchise, the department of transportation shall not exercise its authority, by granting revocable consents or other approvals, to authorize the installation of a structure at a location that would render the location of a licensed newsstand in violation of the siting criteria applicable to the renewal of licenses in subparagraph (a) or (b), as applicable to the renewal of the license of such newsstand, of paragraph two of subdivision d of this section unless the commissioner of such department finds that such installation is for the benefit of public health, safety, welfare or convenience. In the event the installation of a structure not prohibited by this paragraph four causes the location of a newsstand to be in violation of such criteria, such newsstand may be relocated pursuant to the process defined in paragraph five of this subdivision to a location that meets the criteria in subparagraph (a) of such paragraph two. 5. (a) On or after the grant of such a franchise, a newsstand, the location of which fails to meet the siting criteria applicable to the renewal of the license of such newsstand in subparagraph (a) or (b) of paragraph two of subdivision d of this section shall cease operation and shall be removed from such location. A newsstand required by the provisions of this paragraph to be relocated at any time shall be eligible to be relocated to a site within a radius of five hundred feet from such licensed location, referred to in this section as the catchment area, provided such site is identified by the licensee and meets the siting criteria applicable to the renewal of licenses in subparagraph (a) of paragraph two of subdivision d of this section. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this subparagraph (a) of this paragraph five, a newsstand, the license for which is in full force and effect, shall not be required to be replaced before September thirtieth, two thousand six, if the replacement of such newsstand is required to occupy an expanded area solely because of the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act, and the installation of such newsstand at such expanded location would not meet the siting criteria applicable to the renewal of the license of such newsstand in subparagraph (a) or (b) of such paragraph two. (b) If the department of transportation determines that there is no site within such catchment area to which a newsstand may be relocated in accordance with subparagraph (a) of this paragraph five, the licensee of such newsstand may apply for a license for a new newsstand in accordance with the applicable provisions of this subchapter. 6. The department of transportation shall conduct an inspection at the time of the reconstruction and installation of a newsstand by a franchisee in accordance with paragraph two of this subdivision. In addition, such department shall conduct inspections of all newsstands in the year two thousand eight and every six years thereafter to determine whether the location for which each newsstand is licensed violates any laws, rules or regulations applicable to the review by such department of applications for the renewal of licenses, notwithstanding that the term of such licenses is two years, and, except for determinations made pursuant to inspections made in accordance with such paragraph two of this subdivision at the time of the reconstruction and installation of a newsstand by a franchisee, the determination by such department that there is no such violation shall not be revised, except for a mistake of fact, by such department until such six year period has elapsed. § 20-232 Revocation. In addition to any other basis for revocation, a newsstand license may be revoked upon a finding by the commissioner that the location listed in such license was not utilized for a period of two consecutive months or more, that the newsstand licensee is not using the stand primarily for the sale of newspapers and periodicals, or that the newsstand licensee rented or attempted to rent the newsstand to another person. If the commissioner chooses to exercise such power of revocation, the commissioner shall first notify the licensee of an anticipated revocation in writing and afford the licensee thirty days from the date of such notification to correct the condition. The commissioner shall notify the licensee of such thirty-day period in writing. If the licensee proves to the satisfaction of the commissioner that the condition has been corrected within such thirty-day period, the commissioner shall not revoke such license. The commissioner shall permit such proof to be submitted to the commissioner electronically or in person. The licensee may seek review by the commissioner of the determination that the licensee has not submitted such proof within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. § 20-233 Stoop line stands; license required; permitted use. a. It shall be unlawful to maintain a stoop line stand without a license therefor. b. Stoop line stands shall be used for the sale or display of fruits, vegetables, soft drinks, confectionery, ice cream, flowers or any of the foregoing. § 20-234 Stoop line stands on market streets. All such licenses shall be issued by the commissioner, in his or her discretion, with the consent of the owner of the abutting premises, provided however, that where any such stand is to be located in front of any premises facing on a market street, the license shall be issued by the commissioner of small business services, in his or her discretion. § 20-235 Stoop line stands; requirements. No such stand at a location not licensed on the twenty-fourth day of July, nineteen hundred thirty-five, shall be licensed if the proposed location of the stand is within two hundred feet of any store in which any of such articles are sold, or any of such services are rendered, except that the occupant of a store may be licensed to maintain a stand in front of such store for the sale of such articles or services as are provided within the store. § 20-236 Stoop line stands; fees. The fee for such license shall be based on the article or articles permitted to be sold or displayed as follows: 1. For fruits, vegetables, soft drinks or combinations thereof.....eighty dollars 2. For confectionary.....forty dollars 3. For ice cream.....forty dollars 4. For any combination of the foregoing, the license fee shall be the total of the prescribed fees, except that such fee shall not exceed one hundred dollars. § 20-237 Stoop line stands; restrictions. a. Stoop line stands shall not exceed seven feet in height. Every stoop line stand shall be maintained wholly within the stoop line and shall not obstruct the free use of the sidewalk by pedestrians. Stoop line stands shall not exceed ten feet in length nor four feet in width, except as provided in subdivision b of this section. b. Where the sidewalk in front of the premises is at least sixteen feet wide, such stoop line stand may extend up to ten feet in length and five feet in width as long as a straight, unobstructed pathway of at least nine and one- half feet is maintained at all times on the sidewalk in front of the entire length of the premises where such stoop line stand is located. Where the sidewalk in front of the premises is at least twenty-one feet wide, and if the entire premises is located within an M1, M2 or M3 zoning district, and if a stoop line stand on such premises was licensed on or before the first day of September, two thousand twelve, such stoop line stand may extend up to ten feet in length and ten feet in width as long as a straight, unobstructed pathway of at least nine and one-half feet is maintained at all times on the sidewalk in front of the entire length of the premises where such stoop line stand is located. In addition to any license fee required to be paid pursuant to section 20-236 of this subchapter, an applicant seeking to obtain or renew a license for any stoop line stand that extends beyond five feet in width shall pay to the department an inspection fee of seventy-five dollars for each stoop line stand that it seeks to license. Such fee shall be paid with the application for such license and shall be retained by the department regardless of whether the license is granted. c. It shall be unlawful for any person to lease or permit any other person to use any space on the sidewalk located adjacent to such store for the purpose of selling or displaying any merchandise. Violations of this subdivision shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars per day for each day said space is leased. d. The commissioner shall promulgate any rules and regulations necessary for the proper implementation of this section. § 20-238 Stoop line stands; revocation of consent. The commissioner who granted the license for any such stand or display shall revoke or suspend it if the abutting owner files a written revocation of the consent previously granted therefor in the office of such commissioner. § 20-239 Approval. A stoop line stand shall not be licensed unless the location thereof has been approved by the department of transportation. No license shall be approved or renewed if the department of transportation determines that the stoop line stand poses an obstruction to the free use of sidewalks by pedestrians. Notwithstanding anything in this subchapter to the contrary, if the department of transportation determines that a stoop line stand which is permitted to extend more than four feet in width pursuant to section 20-237 of this subchapter poses an obstruction to the free use of sidewalks by pedestrians solely because the width of such stoop line stand exceeds four feet, the commissioner shall approve or renew such license at a width of four feet. § 20-240 Sleeping in stands prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep in any portion of any stand licensed under this subchapter. § 20-240.1 Enforcement. a. Where exigent circumstances exist and a police officer or other authorized officer or employee of any city agency gives notice to the owner or operator of a stand licensed pursuant to section 20-233 of this subchapter to temporarily remove or otherwise disassemble such stand, such owner or operator shall comply with such notice and shall not continue to sell or display from such stand. For the purposes of this subdivision, exigent circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, unusually heavy pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the existence of obstructions in the public space, and accident, fire or other emergency situation, a parade, demonstration or other such event at or near the location of such stand. b. If an owner or operator of a stand licensed pursuant to section 20-233 does not remove or otherwise disassemble such stand when directed to do so by a police officer or other authorized officer or employee of the city in accordance with the provisions of subdivision a of this section, such officer or employee is authorized to provide for the removal of such owner's or operator's goods and stand to any garage, automobile pound or other place of safety, and the owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of such goods and such stand may be charged with reasonable costs for removal and storage payable prior to the release of such goods and such stand. c. In the event that any seizure made pursuant to this section shall include any perishable items or food products which cannot be retained in custody without such items or food products becoming unwholesome, putrid, decomposed or unfit in any way, they may be delivered to the commissioner of health for disposition pursuant to the provisions of section 17-323 of this code. d. Any person who violates the provisions of this section or section 20-237 shall be considered to be an unlicensed general vendor or an unlicensed food vendor and, except as otherwise provided in subdivision c of section 20-237, shall be subject to the penalty and enforcement provisions of either subchapter twenty-seven of chapter two of this title or subchapter two of chapter three of title seventeen of the code, whichever is applicable; except that a person shall not be subject to the civil penalty described above for a first-time violation of subdivision b of section 20-237 and any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that he or she has cured the violation. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof of compliance shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of subdivision b of section 20-237 or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted to the department electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. § 20-241 Newsstands installed and maintained pursuant to a franchise. a. Construction. Upon the grant of a franchise, no person shall construct or install a newsstand other than a franchisee granted such a franchise. Newsstands installed and maintained pursuant to such a franchise shall comply with all applicable law, rules and regulations. b. Transition. Upon the grant of a franchise, each licensee operating or maintaining a newsstand licensed pursuant to this subchapter shall be provided with reasonable notice when such newsstand structure is to be replaced by a newsstand installed and maintained pursuant to such franchise at a location approved by the department of transportation and instructions for applying for a replacement newsstand within the catchment area of such newsstand. Such replacement shall be subject to contractual incentives and/or penalties, if any, to ensure timely replacement of the newsstand pursuant to such franchise. The licensee shall have the option of removing the existing structure or such structure shall be removed by the franchisee granted such franchise. Operation of the newsstand licensed pursuant to this subchapter shall cease during such time as the newsstand is replaced. Upon being notified of the completion of the replacement of the newsstand, the licensee may resume operation pursuant to the terms of his or her license and the provisions of this subchapter. c. Costs. 1. The cost of constructing and installing a replacement newsstand by the franchisee pursuant to such franchise shall be borne by the franchisee in accordance with such franchise. The cost of constructing and installing a newsstand by the franchisee pursuant to such franchise, which newsstand is not a replacement newsstand, shall be borne by the licensee of such newsstand in accordance with paragraph two of this subdivision. 2. A licensee who maintains or operates a newsstand that is not a replacement newsstand and that has been constructed and installed by the franchisee pursuant to such franchise shall reimburse the franchisee for the cost of such construction and installation, which cost shall include costs associated with any interior electric and/or telephone hook-ups to the newsstand structure. The department shall determine the applicable construction and installation costs for purposes of this paragraph, which costs shall be limited to the costs incurred by the franchisee and certified by the franchisee to the department. d. Fees. A licensee licensed to maintain or operate a newsstand constructed and installed by the franchisee pursuant to such franchise shall be liable for the payment to the department of the biennial fee for a license to operate a newsstand payable in accordance with subdivision b of section 20-230 of the code. e. Enforcement. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the commissioner shall be authorized, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, to order any person who is unlawfully operating a newsstand that has been constructed or installed by a person other than the franchisee in violation of subdivision a of this section to remove such newsstand within seven days of the issuance of such order. Such order shall be posted at the premises of such newsstand. If such person does not remove such newsstand within seven days of the issuance of such order, an authorized officer or employee of any city agency or a police officer is authorized to provide for the removal of such person's newsstand and the contents thereof to a place of safety. If such newsstand or the contents thereof are not claimed within thirty days after their removal, they shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be either sold at a public auction after having been advertised in the City Record, the proceeds thereof being paid into the general fund, used or converted for use by the department or another city agency, or otherwise disposed of. Newsstands and the contents thereof that are removed pursuant to this subdivision shall be released to the owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession upon payment of the costs for removal and storage and any civil penalty imposed for the violation or, if an action or proceeding for the violation is pending, upon the posting of a bond or other form of security acceptable to the department in an amount which will secure the payment of such costs and any penalty which may be imposed for the violation. In the event that any removal made pursuant to this subdivision shall include any perishable items, goods, or food products which cannot be retained in custody without such items, goods, or food products becoming unwholesome, putrid, decomposed or unfit in any way, they may be delivered to the commissioner of health and mental hygiene for disposition pursuant to the provisions of section 17-323 of this code. For related unconsolidated provisions, and § 20-241.1 Penalties. a. Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of: (i) one hundred seventy-five dollars for the first violation; (ii) three hundred dollars for the second violation; and (iii) five hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent violation. b. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this section, a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of (i) restrictions imposed pursuant to section 20-231 relating to the display or offering for sale of merchandise from any public space adjacent to a newsstand or from any portion of a newsstand exterior, the affixation of materials to a newsstand or the location of sales made at a newsstand; (ii) paragraph 1 of subdivision h of section 20-231 or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder; (iii) subdivision i of section 20-231 or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder; (iv) subdivision b of section 20-233 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, or (v) subdivision (a) of section 2-66 of title 6 of the rules of the city of New York, or any successor to such provision, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation for any violation described in clauses (i) through (v) of this subdivision. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. c. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this section, a civil penalty of zero dollars shall be imposed for a first violation of subdivision b of section 20-231 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The notice of violation for such first-time violation shall inform the respondent of the provision of law or rule that the department believes the respondent has violated, describe the condition or activity that is the basis for the notice of violation, and advise the respondent that the law authorizes civil penalties for such violation and that subsequent violations may result in the imposition of such civil penalties. Any person who violates subdivision b of section 20-231 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred seventy-five dollars for a second violation and a civil penalty of three hundred dollars for a third or subsequent violation. d. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this section, a person who violates subdivisions (e) or (f) of section 2-70.2 of title 6 of the rules of the city of New York, or any successor to such provisions, shall be liable for a civil penalty of: (i) zero dollars for a first violation; (ii) not more than one hundred seventy-five dollars for a second violation; and (iii) not more than three hundred dollars for a third or subsequent violation. Subchapter 8: Sightseeing Guides § 20-242 Definition. Whenever used in this subchapter the term guide shall mean and include any person who engages in the business of guiding or directing people to any place or point of public interest or who, in connection with any sightseeing trip or tour, describes, explains or lectures concerning any place or point of public interest to any person within the city or obtains the patronage of any person for such trip. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to include any person or persons who describes, explains or lectures concerning any place or point of public interest while aboard a sightseeing boat or vessel regularly engaged in scheduled trips around Manhattan island on navigable waters. § 20-243 License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a guide without a license therefor from the commissioner. § 20-244 Applications. a. Each applicant for such license shall be at least eighteen years of age; and b. Each such applicant shall be required to pass an examination satisfactorily. Such examination shall be under the supervision of the commissioner and shall test the knowledge of the applicant concerning places or points of historic or public interest in and about the city. Any person who can present satisfactory proof to the commissioner that he or she has been engaged as a sightseeing guide in the city for a period of at least two years prior to August second, nineteen hundred thirty-seven shall be exempt from such examination. § 20-245 License fee; display. a. The annual fee for such license shall be twenty-five dollars. b. Each such license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the office or place of business of the licensee, or if a vehicle is used, in such vehicle, or if a guide has no office or uses no vehicle, he or she shall carry such license on his or her person at all times. § 20-246 Fees charged. a. In each bus or vehicle used for sightseeing purposes a schedule shall be permanently displayed showing the full cost per passenger for the trip to be taken. b. It shall be unlawful for any licensed guide to charge a fee in excess of one dollar per hour per person. § 20-247 Regulations. a. The commissioner may prescribe such rules and regulations as he or she deems necessary to protect persons and property in the enforcement of this subchapter. b. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to explain, describe, or lecture while such vehicle is in motion, unless the seating capacity of such vehicle is seven passengers or fewer. Each such driver who talks or lectures must be a licensed guide. c. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to obstruct any street or public space, or to touch any person or to interfere with the free passage of the public along any street or public space for the purpose of soliciting employment as a guide. d. It shall be unlawful for any such guide to wear a uniform or any part thereof and hold himself or herself forth as a guide unless such uniform or part thereof shall be approved by the commissioner. e. Each licensee shall wear on the left breast of his or her outer garment a badge, while engaged in his or her occupation as a guide, bearing his or her number and the date of expiration of his or her license. Such badge shall be furnished by the commissioner. The color of such badge shall be changed each year. f. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to guide or direct any person to a place of ill repute, house of ill fame or assignation, or to any house or place of amusement kept for immoral purposes, or to any place resorted to for the purpose of prostitution or gambling. It shall be unlawful for any such licensee to impart any information as to the location or address of any such houses or places, or to solicit the patronage of any person or persons for any hotel, lodging house or boarding house or place of temporary or permanent abode, or for any place where refreshments are served or amusement of any type provided. g. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to engage in business or do business with any unlicensed guide. § 20-247.1 Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of: (i) one hundred seventy-five dollars for the first violation; (ii) three hundred dollars for the second violation committed; and (iii) five hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent violation committed. Subchapter 9: Pedicabs § 20-248 Legislative findings. It is the purpose of this subchapter to regulate and control pedicab businesses to protect consumers and to ensure the safety of the public, including passengers and drivers operating pedicabs. It is also the purpose of this subchapter to minimize the effect of pedicabs on traffic and congestion by establishing a maximum number of pedicabs that can be authorized to operate in the city. It is the purpose of this subchapter to require the inspection of pedicabs to ensure that pedicabs are safely operated in the streets of the city, and to provide a process for their removal if they have not been inspected as required. § 20-249 Definitions. Whenever used in this subchapter: Family member. The term family member means a member of the immediate family, including, but not limited to, a spouse, domestic partner, sibling, child, grandchild, parent or grandparent. Owned or owns. The term owned or owns means possession with good legal title, or possession under a lease, reserve title contract, conditional sales agreement or vendor's agreement or similar agreement. Pedicab. The term pedicab means a bicycle as defined in the vehicle and traffic law or other device that is designed and constructed to transport or carry passengers, that is solely propelled by human power, and that is operated to transport passengers for hire. Pedicab owner or owner. The term pedicab owner or owner means any person who owns one or more pedicabs in the city of New York. Pedicab business or business. The term pedicab business or business means a pedicab owner who operates or authorizes the operation of one or more pedicabs in the city of New York. Pedicab business license. The term pedicab business license means a license issued by the commissioner pursuant to section 20-250. Pedicab driver. The term pedicab driver means any natural person who propels and operates a pedicab in the city of New York. Pedicab driver license. The term pedicab driver license means a license issued by the commissioner to a pedicab driver to operate a pedicab. Person. The term person means any natural person, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or association. Registration plate. The term registration plate means a unique identification tag issued by the commissioner pursuant to section 20-255. § 20-250 Pedicab business license. a. It shall be unlawful for a pedicab owner to conduct a pedicab business unless such pedicab owner shall have first obtained from the commissioner a pedicab business license. b. In order to obtain, amend or renew a pedicab business license, a pedicab owner must provide the commissioner with the following: 1. A list of all pedicabs owned, leased or controlled by such pedicab owner for which such owner seeks registration pursuant to section 20-255. Each such pedicab shall be uniquely identified on such list; 2. Proof that there is in force for the full license term a policy of public liability and property damage insurance that meets the requirements of section 20-253 of this subchapter for each pedicab listed pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision; and 3. Such other information as the commissioner may require to establish the pedicab owner's eligibility for a pedicab business license under this subchapter. c. A pedicab business license shall be valid for a term of one year, except that business licenses issued prior to November 1, 2010 shall expire on November 1, 2010. There shall be an annual fee of one hundred and ten dollars for such license that shall include the fee for registration, required by section 20-255, of one pedicab. The registration fee for each additional pedicab shall be sixty dollars. The annual fee may be pro-rated by the commissioner for the initial license period. d. Notwithstanding subdivision a of this section, a person holding a pedicab driver license shall not be required to obtain a pedicab business license to drive a pedicab that is owned by a pedicab business licensed under this subchapter. e. The commissioner shall have the authority to deny or revoke a pedicab business license if a pedicab owner fails to obtain the registration plates required pursuant to section 20-255 for the pedicab(s) identified on the list submitted by such owner pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision b of this section. § 20-251 Applications for, and issuance of, registration plates. a. The commissioner shall accept application for registration plates, pursuant to section 20-255, provided that the total number of registration plates shall not exceed eight hundred and fifty. The commissioner shall conduct an annual review of pedicab registrations, and if the number of registration plates issued falls below eight hundred and forty, the Commissioner shall issue additional registration plates in such manner as is consistent with the provisions of this subchapter as he or she by rule shall prescribe. b. The department has the authority to inspect pedicabs to determine whether the pedicabs are equipped with the features set forth in subdivision a of section 20-254 and comply with the requirement set forth in subdivision b of section 20-254. c. The commissioner shall issue registration plates only to a pedicab owner who has submitted the materials required by subdivision b of section 20-250 to obtain, amend or renew a pedicab business license or to a pedicab owner who has already obtained a pedicab business license. d. The commissioner shall not issue registration plates to more than thirty pedicabs for any pedicab business. No pedicab business or pedicab owner shall hold more than thirty registration plates at any one time. A pedicab business shall be deemed to have more than thirty registration plates if: (1) an owner of such pedicab business has a direct or indirect beneficial interest in one or more other pedicab businesses and the businesses together have more than thirty registration plates; (2) a family member of the owner of such business has a direct or indirect beneficial interest in one or more other pedicab businesses and the businesses together have more than thirty registration plates; (3) a person who has a direct or indirect beneficial interest in such pedicab business has a direct or indirect beneficial interest in one or more other pedicab businesses and the businesses together have more than thirty registration plates; or (4) a family member of a person who has a direct or indirect beneficial interest in such pedicab business has a direct or indirect beneficial interest in one or more other pedicab businesses and the businesses together have more than thirty registration plates. e. The commissioner shall issue registration plates only to a pedicab business or owner with respect to pedicabs listed and identified in accordance with paragraph 1 of subdivision b of section 20-250 on the application of such business or owner for a pedicab business license. f. A pedicab registration plate shall become void upon the revocation or suspension of the pedicab owner's pedicab business license. § 20-252 Issuance of pedicab business license. a. A pedicab business license shall be issued only to a person who meets all the requirements of this subchapter and any rules promulgated by the commissioner to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter. b. A pedicab business license shall be valid only for the person in whose name it is issued. c. The commissioner may refuse to issue to a pedicab owner a pedicab business license or to renew a pedicab business license to a pedicab owner based upon a determination that such applicant has engaged in conduct that would constitute a basis for license suspension or revocation as set forth in subdivision a of section 20-261 of this subchapter. d. A pedicab business license cannot be transferred or sold. The commissioner shall promulgate rules as to whether, and the extent to which, a pedicab business license remains valid after any change in the beneficial ownership of a pedicab business, including, without limitation, any such change resulting from a direct or indirect, voluntary or involuntary, sale or transfer of a beneficial ownership interest. § 20-253 Insurance. a. It shall be unlawful for any pedicab business to operate or authorize the operation of a pedicab within the city unless there is in force for such pedicab a policy of insurance that meets the requirements of this section. b. Such policy of liability insurance shall insure such pedicab business and all pedicab drivers of the pedicabs of such business, whether such pedicab drivers are employees of the pedicab business or operate such pedicabs otherwise by agreement with the pedicab business. Such insurance policy must provide, at minimum, the following protection: 1. The pedicab business carries a policy providing liability coverage for injury or death of any person or persons, and damage to or destruction of any property in a combined single limit amount of two million dollars, or such higher amount as the commissioner may determine pursuant to rule, with a maximum of one million dollars for each accident, where liability for such injury or death of a person or persons, or damage to or destruction of property shall arise out of the operation of the pedicab business's pedicabs; or 2. Each pedicab is insured in at least the following amounts, unless the commissioner establishes higher amounts pursuant to rule, where liability for such injury or death of a person or persons, or damage to or destruction of property shall arise out of the operation of the pedicab: (i) for personal injury or death to one person, one hundred thousand dollars; (ii) for personal injury or death to all persons in one accident, three hundred thousand dollars, with a maximum of one hundred thousand dollars for each person; and (iii) for property damage, fifty thousand dollars. c. Such policy of liability insurance shall name the city of New York as an insured party. d. The pedicab business shall notify the commissioner of any modification, amendment, cancellation or substitution of any insurance policy required under subdivision b of this section within fourteen days of the date of the notice to the pedicab business of such modification, amendment, cancellation or substitution. e. If the policy of insurance required by this section lapses for any reason, the license issued pursuant to section 20-250 shall become void for such pedicab business. § 20-254 Required equipment of pedicabs. a. Each pedicab operated in the city shall be equipped with the following features: 1. three or more wheels; 2. a unibody frame for the entire vehicle; 3. seating for no more than three passengers; 4. hydraulic or mechanical disc or drum brakes, which are unaffected by rain or wet conditions; 5. a secondary or emergency brake system; 6. battery-operated headlights capable of projecting a beam of light for a distance of 300 feet; 7. battery-operated taillights which are visible from 500 feet; 8. turn lights; 9. passenger seat belts; 10. an audible signaling device; 11. reflectors on the spokes of the wheels of the pedicab; 12. a timer, of a type approved by the commissioner, affixed within clear view of passengers; 13. a sign attached to the interior of the pedicab within view of passengers indicating the name and telephone number of the pedicab business, the pedicab's registration number and a telephone number that can be used to direct consumer complaints about such pedicab to the department; 14. a sign conspicuously posted on both sides of the exterior of the pedicab indicating in letters and numbers at least two inches high the dollar amount to be charged per minute per ride, and in letters and numbers at least one half of an inch high that: (i) no additional fees may be charged and (ii) drivers must give passengers a pedicab information card; and 15. a sign affixed to the rear of the bicycle seat of the pedicab indicating in letters and numbers at least two inches high the dollar amount to be charged per minute per ride. b. The maximum width of a pedicab shall be fifty-five inches and the maximum length of a pedicab shall be ten feet. c. It shall be unlawful for a pedicab business to operate or authorize the operation of, or for a pedicab driver to operate, a pedicab that does not comply with the requirements of this section. § 20-255 Inspection; registration plate. a. It shall be unlawful for a pedicab business to operate or authorize the operation of, or for a pedicab driver to operate, a pedicab unless: 1. it has been inspected by the department; 2. it has been issued a registration plate that indicates on such plate the expiration date of the current registration; and 3. such registration is in effect. b. The registration shall be valid for a period no longer than one year and the expiration date of such registration plate shall be a date specified by the commissioner by rule, except that the registrations issued prior to November 1, 2010 shall expire on November 1, 2010. c. If the commissioner determines after such inspection that a pedicab is equipped with the features set forth in subdivision a of section 20-254, and complies with the requirement set forth in subdivision b of section 20-254, upon payment of the registration fee provided by section 20-250 of this subchapter, the department shall issue a registration plate to the pedicab business that authorized the operation of such pedicab. d. Such registration plate shall be securely affixed by the department to a conspicuous and indispensable part of each pedicab. e. The registration plate shall be of such material, form, design, and dimension and set forth such distinguishing number or other identification marks as the commissioner shall prescribe. f. A pedicab business shall pay an additional fifty-five dollars as the re-inspection fee for any pedicab that fails to appear at an inspection scheduled by the department or that is determined upon inspection not to meet the requirements of this section and such business re-applies for a registration plate. The commissioner shall also have the authority to determine the circumstances under which reinspections of pedicabs shall be permitted. g. It shall be unlawful for a person to whom a registration plate has been issued to transfer any interest in such plate to any other person unless: 1. the pedicab, if intended to be transferred with the registration plate, complies with all applicable requirements imposed by this subchapter; 2. such transfer will not result in a violation of subdivision d of section 20-251; and 3. the commissioner approves such transfer. § 20-256 Records. Every pedicab business shall maintain such records related to the ownership and operation of its pedicabs as the commissioner may prescribe by rule. Such records shall be made available for inspection by the commissioner at his or her request at either the offices of the pedicab business or at the offices of the department. § 20-257 Pedicab driver license. a. It shall be unlawful for a pedicab driver to operate a pedicab unless the pedicab driver shall have first obtained a pedicab driver license from the commissioner. b. It shall be unlawful for a pedicab business to permit the operation of any pedicabs owned by it by a person who does not have a pedicab driver license and a motor vehicle driver's license in full force and effect. c. In order to obtain or renew a pedicab driver license, a pedicab driver shall file an application with the commissioner for such pedicab driver license. Such application shall be made upon such form as prescribed by the commissioner and shall contain such information as the commissioner may require to establish the applicant's eligibility for a pedicab driver license under this subchapter. d. To be eligible for or to maintain a pedicab driver license, an applicant or licensee shall: 1. be at least eighteen years of age; 2. possess a currently valid motor vehicle driver's license that is in full force and effect; 3. not have his or her motor vehicle driver's license suspended or revoked; and 4. meet such fitness requirements as the commissioner may determine by rule. e. A pedicab driver license shall be valid for a term of one year. There shall be a fee of thirty-five dollars for such license. The commissioner shall establish the expiration date for such license by rule. f. The commissioner may refuse to issue a pedicab driver license or to renew such a license based upon a determination that such pedicab driver has engaged in conduct which would constitute a basis for the suspension or revocation of a pedicab driver license as set forth in subdivision c of section 20-261 of this subchapter. g. Service of a violation, and any related notices, on a pedicab driver shall constitute service on the pedicab business that authorized the operation of such pedicab by virtue of employment, lease, or any other arrangement and shall afford the pedicab business the opportunity to participate in any hearing held on such violation. § 20-258 Display of pedicab driver's identification. a. The commissioner shall provide a photo identification card to each pedicab driver who has obtained a pedicab driver license. Such photo identification card shall include the license number of such pedicab driver license and the motor vehicle driver's license number of such pedicab driver, as well as the issuing state of such motor vehicle driver's license. b. The pedicab driver shall wear such photo identification card so that it is visible to passengers and enforcement officers when such pedicab driver is operating a pedicab. A copy of such photo identification card shall also be displayed inside any pedicab under the control of such driver in a manner clearly visible to the passengers of such pedicab. § 20-259 Restrictions on the operation of pedicabs. a. A pedicab driver shall be subject to all provisions of state and local law governing the operation of a bicycle, which include, but are not limited to, provisions of the vehicle and traffic law, the New York city administrative code, and rules of the city of New York promulgated by the department of transportation and the department of parks and recreation. b. A pedicab driver shall not: 1. operate a pedicab to transport more than three passengers. 2. operate a pedicab in motion while a passenger is standing in such pedicab. 3. operate a pedicab on any bridge or in any tunnel or in any bicycle lane, or within any pedestrian plaza. For purposes of this section pedestrian plaza shall mean an area designated by the New York city department of transportation for use by pedestrians located fully within the bed of a roadway, which may vary in size and shape; may abut a sidewalk; may be at the same level as the roadway or raised above the level of the roadway; may be physically separated from the roadway by curbing, bollards, or other barrier; may be treated with special markings and materials; and may contain benches, tables or other facilities for pedestrian use. 4. permit a pedicab to be operated simultaneously by anyone in addition to him or herself. 5. operate a pedicab that is designed or constructed to permit propulsion by more than one individual at any one time. 6. operate a pedicab while such pedicab driver's ability to operate such pedicab is impaired by the consumption of alcohol, the use of any drug or by any other means or while such pedicab driver is in an intoxicated condition. A pedicab driver operating a pedicab which has been involved in an accident or has been operated in violation of subdivision a of this section shall be deemed to have given consent to a breath test and shall, at the request of a police officer, submit to a breath test to be administered by the police officer. Failure to submit to such breath test shall serve as the basis for an immediate suspension of the pedicab driver's license, subject to a prompt post-suspension hearing. 7. operate a pedicab without a currently valid motor vehicle driver's license or while such pedicab driver's New York State motor vehicle driver's license is suspended or revoked. c. Pedicabs can be operated within any public park or any property under the charge or control of the department of parks and recreation pursuant to the rules of the department of parks and recreation and in accordance with the rules of the department of transportation. d. A pedicab business shall submit to the department, upon such form prescribed by the commissioner, a written report of every accident relating to a pedicab by such pedicab business within twenty-four hours after the occurrence of such accident. Such form shall be signed by a principal or officer of such pedicab business as well as by the pedicab driver involved in such accident with an affirmation of the truth of the contents of the form. e. If there are exigent circumstances and a police officer or other authorized officer or employee of any city agency directs a pedicab driver to move his or her pedicab from any street, avenue or other location, such pedicab driver shall not operate his or her pedicab at such street, avenue or location for the duration of such exigent circumstances. 1. For the purposes of this subdivision, exigent circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, unusually heavy pedestrian or vehicular traffic, existence of any obstructions in the public space, an accident, fire or other emergency, a parade, demonstration or other such event at or near such location. f. If there are exceptional circumstances, the police commissioner, in consultation with the commissioners of the departments of consumer and worker protection and transportation, shall be authorized, upon notice, to restrict or prohibit any pedicab driver from operating his or her pedicab on any street, avenue or other location for a specified period of time. Such specified period of time shall not exceed fourteen days except, during the period that commences November 12 and concludes January 7 of the following year, in and around the area of Manhattan bound on the north by Fifty-ninth Street, on the south by Thirty-ninth Street, on the east by Lexington Avenue and on the west by Eighth Avenue, the fourteen day time limit shall not be in effect. 1. For the purposes of this subdivision, exceptional circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, unusually heavy pedestrian or vehicular traffic, existence of any obstructions in the public space, a parade, demonstration or other such event or occurrence at or near such location. g. Every affected community board may, at any time subsequent to enactment of this local law, conduct public hearings hereon and submit written recommendations to the department, the department of transportation, the police department and the council. Such recommendations may include, but not be limited to, methods to address any impact this law may have on such community with respect to pedestrian and vehicle traffic flow. h. A pedicab business shall design and implement policies and procedures to train all pedicab drivers that operate any pedicabs owned by such pedicab business of the obligation to follow all provisions of state and local law governing the operation of a bicycle, as described in subdivision a of this section, and shall require such drivers to provide a copy of any summons, complaint, or notice of violation of any law or regulation received while operating a pedicab to such pedicab business, as well as a copy of the disposition of such summons, complaint or notice of violation of such pedicab business, within five business days of such drivers' receipt of such documents. It shall be unlawful for a pedicab business to fail to train pedicab drivers to ensure compliance with such requirements. i. A pedicab driver who is arrested, or who receives a summons or complaint for a traffic-related offense or other notice of violation of any law or regulation, while operating a pedicab, shall provide a copy of the record of such arrest or a copy of such summons, complaint or notice of violation to the pedicab business to which such pedicab is registered within five business days of such driver's receipt of such documents. A pedicab driver shall also provide a copy of the disposition of such arrest, summons, complaint, or notice of violation to such pedicab business within five days of receipt of such disposition. It shall be unlawful for a pedicab driver to fail to provide any of these documents to the pedicab business. § 20-260 Rates of pedicabs. a. Rates for pedicab rides shall be based on time calculated per minute per ride. Each pedicab driver shall make such calculation using the timer affixed to the pedicab pursuant to paragraph 12 of subdivision a of section 20-254 of this subchapter. Each pedicab driver shall activate such timer when all passengers are seated and the pedicab ride commences, and shall stop the timer when the pedicab has reached its destination and the pedicab is at a full stop. 1. It shall be unlawful for a pedicab driver to charge any added fee, including fees for additional passengers. 2. Each minute shall be charged at the same rate. 3. Rates shall be displayed on the exterior of the pedicab and the rear of the bike seat on the pedicab pursuant to paragraphs 14 and 15 of subdivision a of section 20-254 of this subchapter at all times. b. It shall be unlawful for a pedicab driver to charge a passenger a higher rate than the rate displayed on the pedicab pursuant to paragraphs 14 and 15 of subdivision a of section 20-254 of this subchapter. c. Pedicab Information Card. 1. The department shall create a pedicab information card in a size and style to be determined by the commissioner that states in substance: (i) all pedicabs shall display a sign disclosing the price to be charged per minute per ride on the exterior of the pedicab and the rear of the bike seat of the pedicab; (ii) drivers are not permitted to charge tax; (iii) gratuity is not required; (iv) it shall be unlawful for a pedicab driver to charge any added fee, including fees for additional passengers; (v) passengers may call 311 if they have a complaint regarding a pedicab driver or business; and (vi) such additional information as required by the commissioner. Each such document shall include an area where each pedicab driver shall insert: (i) his or her name and pedicab driver's license number, which shall be clearly identified as a department license number; (ii) the pedicab business name, address, telephone number and pedicab business license number, which shall be clearly identified as a department license number; (iii) the rate per ride as indicated on the exterior of the pedicab and the rear of the bike seat of the pedicab pursuant to paragraphs 14 and 15 of subdivision a of section 20-254 of this subchapter; (iv) the date; (v) the total number of minutes and/ or fraction of a minute of the pedicab ride; and (vi) the total charge of the pedicab ride. 2. Such pedicab information card shall be distributed to every pedicab driver licensed pursuant to section 20-257 of this subchapter by the department in a manner to be determined by the commissioner. 3. Before a passenger enters a pedicab, the driver shall provide such passenger with the information card required by paragraph one of this subdivision with the following information inserted by the driver: (i) the driver's name and pedicab driver's license number; (ii) the pedicab business name, address, telephone number and pedicab business license number; and (iii) the rate per ride as indicated on the exterior of the pedicab and the rear of the bike seat of the pedicab pursuant to paragraphs 14 and 15 of subdivision a of section 20-254 of this subchapter. At the conclusion of the pedicab ride, the driver shall enter the following information on the information card: (i) the date; (ii) the total number of minutes and/or fraction of a minute of the pedicab ride; and (iii) the total charge of the pedicab ride. The driver shall then return the information card to the passenger. § 20-261 Denial of license or renewal, suspension and revocation. a. In addition to any of the powers that may be exercised by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter or chapter one of this title, the commissioner, after due notice and an opportunity to be heard, may suspend or revoke a pedicab business license upon the occurrence of any one or more of the following conditions: 1. the occurrence of fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements contained in the application for such license; 2. the operation of a pedicab, owned by the pedicab business, by a pedicab driver who does not have in full force and effect a pedicab driver license and a motor vehicle driver's license; 3. the operation of a pedicab, owned by the pedicab business, that has not been inspected or that does not have affixed to it a registration plate as required by section 20-255 of this subchapter; or 4. violation by a pedicab business of any of the provisions of chapter one of this title, provisions of this subchapter, rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter, or any other law applicable to the operation of a pedicab business. b. Notwithstanding subdivision a of this section, upon the occurrence of any of the conditions set forth in subdivision a, if the commissioner determines that continued possession by a pedicab owner of a pedicab business license would pose an exigent danger to the public, the commissioner may suspend such pedicab business license, subject to a prompt post-suspension hearing. c. In addition to any of the powers that may be exercised by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter or chapter one of this title, the commissioner, after due notice and an opportunity to be heard, may suspend or revoke a pedicab driver license upon the occurrence of any one or more of the following conditions: 1. the occurrence of fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements contained in the application for such license; 2. the operation of a pedicab that has not been inspected or that does not have affixed to it a registration plate as required by section 20-255 of this subchapter; or 3. the violation by a pedicab driver of any of the provisions of chapter one of this title, provisions of this subchapter, rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter, or of any other law applicable to the operation of a pedicab by such pedicab driver. d. Notwithstanding subdivision c of this section, upon the occurrence of any of the provisions set forth in subdivision c of this section, if the commissioner determines that continued possession by a pedicab driver of a pedicab driver license would pose an exigent danger to the public, the commissioner may suspend such pedicab driver license, subject to a prompt post- suspension hearing. e. 1. Any pedicab driver who has been found to have committed: (i) one violation of paragraph 7 of subdivision b of section 20-259 within any twelve-month period shall have his or her pedicab drivers license suspended by the commissioner for a period of not less than three months. (ii) two violations of paragraph 7 of subdivision b of section 20-259 within any twelve-month period shall have his or her pedicab drivers license revoked by the commissioner. (iii) one violation of paragraph 6 of subdivision b of section 20-259 within any twelve-month period shall have his or her license revoked by the commissioner. 2. For purposes of this subdivision, all violations committed on any one day by any one pedicab shall constitute a single violation. f. Any pedicab business that has been found to have been in violation of section 20-255 at least one time within any twelve month period shall have its business license suspended by the commissioner for a period of not less than one month. Any pedicab business that has been found to have been in violation of section 20-255 at least three times within any twelve month period shall have its business license suspended by the commissioner for a period of not less than one year. For purposes of this subdivision only, all violations committed on any one day shall constitute a single violation. g. A pedicab business that, or pedicab driver who, has had its, his or her license revoked, in accordance with this section may not apply for a new license for three years from the date of revocation. h. In addition to any of the powers that may be exercised by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter, the commissioner, after due notice and an opportunity to be heard, may suspend, revoke, deny or refuse to renew a pedicab business license based on a determination that the number and/or type of violation or violations issued to drivers of pedicabs owned by such business indicate that the operation of such business poses a threat to public safety. i. Any pedicab that is found in violation of paragraph 4, paragraph 5 or paragraph 9 of subdivision a of section 20-254 three times or more within any twelve month period shall have its registration suspended by the commissioner for a period of not less than one year and such pedicab shall not be operated during such period. § 20-262 Failure to display pedicab registration or pedicab driver's license. a. In any civil, criminal or administrative action or proceeding, the failure to display the registration plate on the pedicab on which it is required to be displayed as provided in section 20-255 of this subchapter shall be presumptive evidence that such pedicab has not been inspected and is not duly registered as required by this subchapter. b. In any civil, criminal or administrative action or proceeding, the failure by a pedicab driver who is required to be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter to display or to exhibit on demand such pedicab driver's license in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter to any officer or employee authorized to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, shall be presumptive evidence that such pedicab driver is not duly licensed. § 20-263 Penalties. a. It is a traffic infraction to violate any provision of this subchapter and such traffic infractions shall be punishable in accordance with section eighteen hundred of the New York state vehicle and traffic law. b. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of: (1) two hundred dollars for the first violation and for each additional violation committed on the same day; (2) five hundred dollars for the second violation committed, and each additional violation committed on the same day, within a one-year period; and (3) one thousand dollars for the third and any subsequent violation committed, and each additional violation committed on the same day, within a one-year period; provided that any person who violates section 20-253, paragraph 6 or 7 of subdivision b or subdivision d or e of section 20-259, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, shall be subject to a civil penalty of: (1) five hundred dollars for the first violation; (2) one thousand dollars for the second violation committed, and each additional violation committed on the same day, within a one-year period; and (3) four thousand dollars for the third and any subsequent violation committed, and each additional violation committed on the same day, within a one-year period; and provided further that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of paragraph 13, 14 or 15 of subdivision a of section 20-254 or subdivision d or e of section 20-255 or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to subdivision b of section 20-265 of this subchapter, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of paragraph 13, 14 or 15 of subdivision a of section 20-254 or subdivision d or e of section 20-255 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to subdivision b of section 20-265 of this subchapter. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. The pedicab business that authorizes the operation of such pedicab shall be jointly and severally liable with the pedicab driver thereof, for the penalties imposed by this section. c. A violation of section 20-250 or 20-257 or paragraph 6 of subdivision b of section 20-259 of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder shall constitute a violation punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or imprisonment of up to fifteen days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. d. Any police or peace officer or authorized officer or employee of the department, upon service on the pedicab business or pedicab driver of a notice of violation for the failure of the pedicab business to obtain the required inspection of a pedicab or have a valid registration plate affixed to the pedicab pursuant to section 20-255 or for the failure of a pedicab driver to be licensed pursuant to section 20-257, may seize such pedicab. Any pedicab seized pursuant to this subdivision shall be delivered into the custody of the department or other appropriate agency. The commissioner shall hold a hearing to adjudicate the violation of subdivision a of section 20-255 or section 20-257 within two business days after the date of the seizure and shall render his or her determination within two business days after the conclusion of the hearing. e. A pedicab business shall be eligible to obtain release of a pedicab seized pursuant to subdivision d of this section prior to the hearing provided for in such subdivision, if such business has not been found liable for a violation of subdivision a of section 20-255 or section 20-257 within a five-year period prior to the violation resulting in seizure. The pedicab shall be released to such business upon the posting of an all cash bond in a form satisfactory to the commissioner in an amount sufficient to cover the maximum civil penalties which may be imposed for a violation of subdivision a of section 20-255 or section 20-257 and all reasonable costs for removal and storage of such vehicle. f. Where the commissioner, after adjudication of the violation of subdivision a of section 20-255 or section 20-257, finds that the pedicab business has not violated such subdivision, the department shall promptly release such pedicab upon written demand of the pedicab business. g. Where the commissioner, after adjudication of the violation of subdivision a of section 20-255 or section 20-257, finds a violation of such subdivision or such section, then (i) if the pedicab is not subject to forfeiture pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision i of this section, the department shall release such pedicab to the pedicab business upon payment of all applicable civil penalties and all reasonable costs of removal and storage; or (ii) if the pedicab is subject to forfeiture pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision i of this section, the department may release such pedicab to the pedicab business upon payment of all civil penalties and all reasonable costs of removal and storage, or may commence a forfeiture action within ten days after the written demand by such business for such pedicab. h. The department shall establish by rule the time within which pedicabs that are not redeemed may be deemed abandoned and the procedures for disposal. i. 1. In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided for in section 20-261 or in this section, a pedicab seized pursuant to subdivision d of this section, and all rights, title and interest therein shall be subject to forfeiture to the city upon notice and judicial determination thereof if the pedicab business that owns such pedicab has been found liable at least two times within a five-year period for failing to have such pedicab inspected as required by subdivision a of section 20-255 or for permitting operation by an unlicensed pedicab driver in violation of section 20-257. 2. A forfeiture action pursuant to this subdivision shall be commenced by the filing of a summons with a notice or a summons and complaint in accordance with the civil practice law and rules. Such summons with notice or a summons and complaint shall be served in accordance with the civil practice law and rules on the pedicab business that owns such pedicab, and on any person listed on an application or other record of the department as an owner of such pedicab. A pedicab which is the subject of such action shall remain in the custody of the department or other appropriate agency pending the final determination of the forfeiture action. 3. Any person who receives notice of the institution of a forfeiture action who claims an interest in the pedicab subject to forfeiture may assert a claim in such action for the recovery of the pedicab or satisfaction of such owner's interest in such pedicab. 4. Forfeiture pursuant to this subdivision shall be made subject to the interest of a person who claims an interest in such pedicab pursuant to subdivision three of this subdivision, where such person establishes that: (i) such pedicab was operated without having been inspected as required by subdivision a of section 20-255 or operated in violation of section 20-257 without the knowledge of such person, or if such person had knowledge of such operation, that such person did not consent to such operation by doing all that could reasonably have been done to prevent such operation, or (ii) that the operation of such pedicab without having been inspected as required by subdivision a of section 20-255 or operated in violation of section 20-257 was conducted by any person other than such person claiming an interest in the pedicab, while such pedicab was unlawfully in the possession of a person who acquired possession thereof in violation of the criminal laws of the United States or any state. 5. The department or agency having custody of the pedicab, after judicial determination of forfeiture, shall, by public notice of at least five days, sell such forfeited pedicab at public sale. The net proceeds of any such sale shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 6. In any forfeiture action commenced pursuant to this subdivision, where the court awards a sum of money to one or more persons in satisfaction of such person's interest in the forfeited pedicab, the total amount awarded to satisfy such interest or interests shall not exceed the amount of the net proceeds of the sale of the forfeited vehicle after deduction of the lawful expenses incurred by the city, including reasonable costs of removal and storage of the pedicab between the time of the seizure and the date of sale. j. The penalties provided by subdivisions a, b, c, d and i of this section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other provision of law or rule promulgated thereunder. § 20-264 Enforcement. Authorized officers and employees of the department, the police department and any department designated by the commissioner, and any police or peace officer shall have the power to enforce any provision of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this subchapter. § 20-265 Rules. a. The commissioner may make and promulgate such rules and prescribe such forms as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter. The commissioners of the department of transportation and the department of parks and recreation may also make and promulgate such rules as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter. b. The commissioner may authorize pedicabs to display advertising to the extent permitted by rules promulgated pursuant to this section. § 20-266 Reporting. Eighteen months after the local law that added this section, the commissioner, in consultation with the commissioners of the departments of transportation and the police department, shall submit a report to the mayor and the speaker of the council regarding the effectiveness of these regulations at ensuring the safety of pedicab consumers and minimizing the effects of pedicabs on traffic and congestion. Such report shall include, among other things, the number of pedicab business licenses issued, the number of pedicabs that have registered, the number of pedicab driver licenses issued, the number of pedicab business and pedicab driver applications received by the department, the number of pedicab business and pedicab driver applicants on a waiting list, if any, and the number of traffic accidents involving pedicabs. Subchapter 11: Dealers in Second-Hand Articles. § 20-264 Definitions. a. As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Add-on product. The term "add-on product" means any product or service offered with a second-hand automobile, including, but not limited to, automobile service contracts, extended service contracts, prepaid maintenance packages, road service or club membership, theft protection, car alarm, auto immobilizer, vehicle identification number etching, mechanical breakdown, guaranteed auto protection, and credit life, accident or disability insurance, and biweekly payment plans. Business day. The term "business day" means any day other than Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday. Dealer in second-hand articles. The term "dealer in second-hand articles" means any person who, in any way or as a principal broker or agent: 1.Deals in the purchase or sale of second-hand articles of whatever nature, or 2. Accepts or receives second-hand articles as returns of merchandise or in exchange for or for credits on any other articles or merchandise, or 3. Deals in the purchase or sale of any second-hand manufactured article composed wholly or in part of gold, silver, platinum or other metals, or 4. Deals in the purchase or sale of old gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals, or 5. Deals in the purchase of articles or things comprised of gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals for the purpose of melting or refining, or 6. Engages in melting previous metals for the purpose of selling, or 7. Deals in the purchase or sale of pawnbroker tickets or other evidence of pledged articles, or 8. Not being a pawnbroker deals in the redemption or sale of pledged articles, or 9. Deals in the purchase or sale of any used electrical appliance, electronic equipment or component parts. Financing. The term "financing" means any agreement, including a loan, installment agreement, or deferred payment plan where the consumer agrees to make payments subsequent to the execution of the sales contract, regardless of whether the payments are made to the second-hand automobile dealer or to a third-party assigned the agreement. Retail installment contract. The term "retail installment contract" means a retail installment contract, as that term is defined in subdivision 5 of section 301 of the personal property law, that is entered into in the city of New York by a second-hand automobile dealer and a consumer of a second-hand automobile for the purchase of a second-hand automobile. Retail installment sale. The term "retail installment sale" means a retail installment sale as that term is defined in subdivision 4 of section 301 of the personal property law. Second-hand automobile dealer. The term "second-hand automobile dealer" means a dealer in second-hand articles that deals in the purchase or sale of second-hand automobiles. Trade-in automobile. The term "trade-in automobile" means an automobile provided to a second-hand automobile dealer by a consumer as a trade-in or a down-payment toward the purchase of a second-hand automobile pursuant to a sales contract. b. Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to apply to: 1. Pianos, books, magazines, rugs, tapestries, artists' burlaps, painting, sculpture, drawings, etchings and engravings; 2. The first purchase or sale in the city of any imported second-hand article; 3. The acceptance or receipt of merchandise which is not second-hand as a return, exchange, or for credit or refund if such merchandise was originally purchased as new merchandise from the person accepting or receiving the same, nor to the resale of such merchandise; 4.The acceptance or receipt of second-hand merchandise as a return, trade-in, exchange, or for credit or refund if such merchandise was originally purchased as new merchandise from the person accepting or receiving the same, nor to the first subsequent sale or exchange of such merchandise to any person other than an ultimate consumer; 5. The first sale, at retail of merchandise which has been rebuilt by the manufacturer or vendor originally manufacturing it, or the licensed agents thereof, and sold as factory rebuilt merchandise. c. The burden of proof that an article was originally purchased from the person accepting or receiving it, that it was the first subsequent sale or exchange thereof to a person other than an ultimate consumer or that it was a first sale at retail of such factory rebuilt merchandise shall be upon the person asserting the same. Evidence of an existing trade-practice in the city, if any, shall be admissible for the purpose of determining whether or not merchandise is second-hand. § 20-265 License Required. a. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a dealer in second-hand articles without a license therefor. b. There shall be the following types of licenses: A general license which shall authorize the licensee to act as a secondhand dealer with respect to all articles other than secondhand automobiles, within the city during the license period specified in section 20-266 of this subchapter. A secondhand automobile dealer's license which shall authorize the licensee to act as a secondhand dealer with respect to secondhand automobiles within the city during the license period specified in section 20-266 of this subchapter. § 20-266 Bonds; fee; term; fingerprinting. a. Each dealer securing a general license shall furnish a bond to the city, with sufficient surety, to be approved by the commissioner in the penal sum of one thousand dollars conditioned for the due observance of the law relating to such dealers. b. The fee for licenses shall be as follows: for a general license, a biennial fee of three hundred forty dollars; for a second-hand automobile dealer's license, a biennial fee of six hundred dollars. c. The commissioner shall require that applicants for licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter be fingerprinted for the purpose of securing criminal history records from the state division of criminal justice services. The applicant shall pay a processing fee as required by the state division of criminal justice services. Fingerprints shall be taken of the individual owner if the applicant is a sole proprietorship; the general partners if the applicant is a partnership; and the officers, principals, directors, and stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation if the applicant is a corporation. Any person required to be fingerprinted hereunder shall furnish to the department three current passport-size photographs of such person. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the commissioner need not require applicants for licenses required under this subchapter to be fingerprinted if criminal history records concerning such applicants are not available from the state division of criminal justice services. § 20-266.1 Refusal to issue or renew, or suspension or revocation based on criminal conviction. In addition to any of the powers that may be exercised by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter or chapter one of this title, the commissioner, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, may refuse to issue or renew, or may suspend or revoke, a license required under this subchapter if the applicant or licensee, or any of its principals, officers or directors, or any of its stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation has been convicted of a crime which, in the judgment of the commissioner, has a direct relationship to such person's fitness or ability to perform any of the activities for which a license is required under this subchapter or has been convicted of any other crime which, in accordance with article twenty-three-a of the correction law, would provide a justification for the commissioner to refuse to issue or renew, or to suspend or revoke, such license. § 20-267 Report to the police commissioner. Subject to the provisions of section 20-273 of this subchapter, every dealer in second-hand articles, upon being served with a written notice to do so by a member of the police department, shall report to the police commissioner, on blank forms to be furnished by such department, a copy of any of the records required to be kept under section 20-273 of this subchapter, of all goods or articles or any part thereof, purchased, received or sold in the course of his or her business, during the days specified in such notice. § 20-268 Restrictions. a. It shall be unlawful for any dealer in second-hand articles to carry on his or her business at any place other than the one designated in such license. b. It shall be unlawful for any such dealer to purchase any second-hand goods, or things from any person whom he or she knows to be or has reason to believe is a minor. c. It shall be unlawful for any person whose principal business is dealing in second-hand articles to purchase any second-hand goods or articles from any person between the hours of 12:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. d. It shall be unlawful for any such dealer to sell or dispose of any articles or things except household furniture, curtains, carpets, stoves, kitchen utensils, office furniture, automobiles, motor and other vehicles, machinery, belting, building materials and barrels, or other articles or things received from a dealer or pawnbroker, or which have been received from persons known to be jewelers, dealers, banking institutions, executors or administrators, until the expiration of fifteen days after such purchase or redemption. e. All second-hand articles or things purchased for the purpose of melting or refining by persons principally engaged in such business, from persons who are not jewelers or dealers, shall not be sold, refined or melted or disposed of until the expiration of fifteen days after such purchase. Such items as described in the preceding paragraph shall be kept on the premises described in the license which is required by section 20-265 of this chapter. f. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as a dealer in second-hand articles, to be licensed as a pawnbroker. It shall be unlawful for any such dealer to receive any article by way of pledge or pawn, or employ subterfuge for receiving goods as security for the advancement of money; nor shall any sign, device or subterfuge be displayed, used or employed by any such dealer in or about the premises where such business is conducted, which in any way resembles the emblem or sign commonly used by pawnbrokers, or which is intended to give the appearance that the business conducted on such premises is, or is connected with, the business of a pawnbroker; nor shall there be any sign displayed which is calculated to deceive. g. 1. All open lots used as places of storage by junk dealers and dealers in second-hand articles, except lots used as places of display by dealers engaged exclusively in the sale of used or second-hand automobiles, shall be enclosed on all sides adjoining any street by a sheet metal or wooden fence which shall be sufficient to obscure such premises from the public view, and at least six feet in height. It shall be unlawful for such dealer to display or exhibit such property or articles on or in front of any such fence. It shall be the duty of such dealer occupying such premises to keep such fence free and clear of all signs, posters, handbills or other forms of advertisement of any sort whatsoever, except that such dealer may display one sign not exceeding twenty-four feet in length by six feet in height on such fence on each street which such premises shall adjoin, such sign to be used for the purpose of advertising the business of such dealer. The same restrictions shall apply to the owner of such premises in the event that such premises are made available for lease by such owner.  2.   It shall be unlawful to stack or to permit the stacking of any motor vehicles of any kind, or any parts thereof, upon any private property within the city unless such vehicles or parts thereof are completely enclosed within a building, or within an area surrounded by a six foot high fence constructed of sheet metal or wood. When stacked in an open lot such motor vehicles or parts thereof shall be on the interior portion of the lot and the base of such stack shall be a distance of not less than twenty feet from such fence, and the height of such stack shall not exceed twenty feet. There shall be no less than a five hundred foot distance between the area so used and any place of worship, school or other public building. 3. The commissioner shall cause periodic inspection to be made of the area and must be satisfied that such premises comply with all laws and rules and regulations of the department of buildings, the fire department, the department of transportation, the department of health and mental hygiene, and the department of environmental protection insofar as the same are applicable thereto. For purposes of facilitating the inspection prescribed by this section, the commissioner is authorized to call upon the heads of the above named departments and such departments and their employees shall make such inspections as may be required. 4. The provisions set forth in paragraph (2) hereof relating to the five hundred foot distance from any place of worship, school or public building, shall not apply to any existing licensed premises. h. 1. A person who is licensed as a dealer in secondhand automobiles who sells a secondhand automobile, automobile part or equipment that is identified as having been recalled by the national highway transportation safety administration ("NHTSA"), pursuant to its authority under chapter 301 of title 49 of the United States code, must provide to the purchaser, prior to the execution of the contract for sale, a copy of the recall information for such secondhand automobile, automobile part or equipment, as printed out directly from the NHTSA website, https://www.nhtsa.gov/recalls, or any successor to such website. Such disclosure shall be made in writing and that writing must be signed or initialed by the purchaser of the secondhand automobile, automobile part or equipment. Such signed or initialed disclosure shall be maintained by the dealer, in either electronic or paper form, for no less than five years and such disclosure shall be subject to inspection by the commissioner. 2. Nothing in this subdivision shall supersede any existing city, state or federal law or regulation pertaining to automobile safety or roadworthiness, or prevent the department or any other city, state or federal agency from enforcing any city, state or federal law or regulation pertaining to automobile safety or roadworthiness. § 20-268.1 Sale and financing of second-hand automobiles. a. No mandatory financing. A second-hand automobile dealer shall not require a consumer to accept financing or assistance in obtaining financing from a lender as a condition of the purchase of an automobile, and shall not increase the price of such automobile on the basis that the consumer has secured financing from a third-party lender. b. Conditional sales contract. No retail installment contract for the purchase of a second-hand automobile shall include a term rendering the contract voidable, subject to modification, or otherwise not binding upon a second-hand automobile dealer because of such dealer's inability or unwillingness to sell, assign or otherwise transfer the contract to a third party after execution of the sales contract. c. Payment price packing. A second-hand automobile dealer shall not: 1. Require a consumer to purchase any add-on product as a condition of purchasing a second-hand automobile or obtaining financing from a lender for the purchase of an automobile; or 2. Charge a consumer a higher amount if such consumer does not purchase an add-on product, and shall not condition a financing offer on any such purchase. d. False information provided to lender or finance company. In connection with the sale or offer for sale of a second-hand automobile, a second-hand automobile dealer or employees or agents thereof shall not: 1. Prepare, participate, assist or direct any person to prepare, participate or assist in the submission of a false, misleading, or deceptive credit application or contract to a lender or finance company; or 2. Request or allow a consumer to sign a blank or incomplete credit application or contract. e. Disclosures. 1. Prior to the execution of any bill of sale, a second-hand automobile dealer shall provide to each consumer a document that discloses the availability of a contract cancellation option. The form and content of the required disclosure shall be prescribed by the commissioner by rule. 2. Prior to the execution of any retail installment contract, a second-hand automobile dealer that offers financing to a consumer of a second-hand automobile or assists such consumer in obtaining financing from a lender shall provide to such consumer in writing all disclosures required by the federal truth in lending act and by article nine of the personal property law. In addition to such disclosures, a second-hand automobile dealer shall provide to such consumer, in a form prescribed by the commissioner by rule, a document containing the following disclosures: (a) The price of each add-on product to be included in such retail installment contract; (b) The total cost of the automobile and the monthly payments, including any amounts associated with financing, that the consumer will be required to make to purchase the automobile (i) with each such add-on product included, (ii) without any add-on product included, and (iii) with all such add-on products. (c) The lowest annual percentage rate offered to such consumer by the financing companies from whom the dealer has solicited financing on behalf of the consumer; and (d) Any other financing-related disclosure prescribed by the commissioner by rule. 3. The disclosures described in this subdivision shall be provided to the consumer in the language in which the sale or finance agreement was negotiated, provided the commissioner has made available to second-hand automobile dealers such disclosures in such language. 4. Receipt of the disclosures described in this subdivision must be acknowledged by the consumer by signing or initialing in writing. f. Waiver prohibited. No retail installment contract or other contract related to the purchase of a second-hand automobile may require a consumer to waive any of the protections provided by this section. § 20-268.2 Automobile contract cancellation option. a. Prior to executing a bill of sale with a consumer for the purchase of an automobile, a second-hand automobile dealer shall offer such consumer an automobile contract cancellation option that authorizes such consumer to cancel the sales contract, subject to the conditions set forth in this section. Until such option is declined in writing or forfeited by such consumer, such dealer may retain possession of and title to such automobile. b. An automobile contract cancellation option shall be contained in a document separate from any sales, purchase, or financing agreement or contract and its terms shall be incorporated into the bill of sale governing each sale. The form and content of such automobile contract cancellation option document shall be prescribed by the commissioner by rule. The automobile contract cancellation option document shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 1. The name of the second-hand automobile dealer and the consumer; 2. A description of the second-hand automobile and the vehicle identification number of such automobile; 3. A statement specifying that the consumer may exercise the option to cancel the sales contract no later than the dealer's close of business on the second business day following the day on which the bill of sale was signed by the consumer or the day on which the retail installment contract was signed by the consumer, whichever occurs later; 4. A statement that the consumer has the option to cancel the sales contract and obtain a full refund and that such option will apply only if, within the two business day period specified in the automobile contract cancellation option document, such consumer personally delivers to the second- hand automobile dealer a written statement signed by such consumer, pursuant to paragraph 8 of this subdivision, exercising the option to cancel the sales contract; 5. A statement clearly indicating the date and time by which the option to cancel the sales contract may be exercised; 6. A statement specifying that the second-hand automobile dealer may retain possession of and title to such vehicle until such consumer declines in writing the option to cancel the sales contract or forfeits such option; 7. A statement that, when signed by the consumer, acknowledges receipt of the automobile contract cancellation option document and indicates whether such consumer has accepted or declined the option offered therein; 8. A statement that, if signed by such consumer, will either execute the cancellation of the sales contract, provided all necessary conditions for such cancellation have been met, or decline such cancellation, provided further that the consumer has previously accepted the automobile contract cancellation option; 9. A statement specifying that the consumer will execute documents reasonably necessary to effectuate the cancellation of the sales contract and the refund as reasonably required to comply with applicable law; and 10. If the sales contract includes a trade-in automobile, a statement specifying the consumer's rights in connection with such automobile and the terms and conditions that apply if such consumer elects to use the trade-in automobile during the cancellation period. c. A consumer who has accepted an automobile contract cancellation option may exercise the option to cancel the sales contract no later than the dealer's close of business on the second business day following the day on which either the bill of sale or the retail installment contract was signed by such consumer, whichever such signing occurred later. A consumer shall forfeit the option to cancel the sales contract by failing to respond in writing to the business within such cancellation period. d. A consumer's timely in-person delivery to the second-hand automobile dealer of the automobile contract cancellation option with such consumer's signature shall constitute sufficient written notice to such dealer of such consumer's exercise of the option to cancel the sales contract. e. Upon delivery in person by a consumer of a written, signed statement exercising the option to cancel the sales contract in compliance with an automobile contract cancellation option, the second-hand automobile dealer shall immediately cancel the contract and provide such consumer with a full refund, including any sales tax collected in connection with the purchase. f. The second-hand automobile dealer shall provide a consumer with a copy of the contract cancellation option document containing such consumer's signature accepting or declining the terms of the option. If the consumer exercises such option, the dealer shall provide such consumer with a copy of the document submitted by such consumer exercising such option. g. A consumer who accepts an automobile contract cancellation option as part of a sales contract in which a trade-in automobile is included shall pay a refundable deposit of $100, and may: 1. Leave the trade-in automobile with the second-hand automobile dealer, who shall retain such automobile until the consumer exercises the option to cancel the sales contract or the option expires. If the consumer exercises the option to cancel the sales contract, such dealer shall keep the $100 deposit and return the trade-in automobile to the consumer no later than the day on which the consumer exercises such option. If the consumer declines to exercise the option to cancel the sales contract, such dealer shall return the $100 deposit to the consumer. If such dealer inadvertently sells or otherwise transfers title to the trade-in automobile as a result of bona fide error, notwithstanding reasonable procedures designed to avoid that error, such sale or transfer of title shall not be considered a violation of this paragraph, and the full refund described in subdivision e of this section shall include the retail market value of such trade-in automobile, or its value as stated in the sales contract, whichever is greater; or 2. Use the trade-in automobile during the cancellation period for a non-refundable fee of $50 payable to the second-hand automobile dealer. During such cancellation period, the consumer shall be prohibited from driving more than 250 miles in the trade-in automobile and must return such automobile in the same condition as when such automobile was presented to such dealer as a trade-in automobile, excepting any reasonable wear and tear. If the consumer declines to exercise the option to cancel the sales contract, such dealer shall return the $100 deposit to the consumer, provided that if the consumer does not comply with the terms and conditions governing the use of such trade-in automobile during the cancellation period, the dealer may either cancel the sales contract or keep such deposit. The dealer shall not be required to deliver the second-hand automobile to the consumer until the trade-in automobile has been delivered to the dealer. h. A second-hand automobile dealer shall not increase the price of an automobile or impose a fee on a consumer in connection with the exercise of an automobile contract cancellation option except as provided in subdivision g of this section. i. A second-hand automobile dealer shall not require that a consumer declines an automobile contract cancellation option or declines cancelling a sales contract as a condition for the purchase of a second-hand automobile. § 20-268.3 Second-hand automobile contract documents to be provided in advance. In advance of execution of any contract between a second-hand automobile dealer and a customer for the sale of a second-hand automobile, including, but not limited to, a buyer's order, retail installment contract, bill of sale, automobile contract cancellation option document, or service contract, a second-hand automobile dealer shall provide to such consumer a copy of such contract, all documents incorporated or referenced in such contract, and all documents to be signed or initialed by such consumer in connection with such contract, in the language used by such dealer to negotiate the sale of such second-hand automobile. § 20-268.4 Second-hand automobile dealer to post consumer bill of rights. a. On or before December 1, 2017, the department shall create a consumer bill of rights that informs consumers of second-hand automobiles of certain rights and protections that are afforded to them by law. The commissioner shall determine the contents of such bill of rights by rule, provided that the bill of rights shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 1. Every second-hand automobile dealer in New York city is required to offer an automobile contract cancellation option to each consumer of a second- hand automobile; 2. A consumer of a second-hand automobile is not required to accept financing from a second-hand automobile dealer and has the right to pay for such automobile in cash or seek a loan from another lender; 3. A second-hand automobile dealer shall not sell a second-hand automobile at a price higher than the price advertised, quoted or posted on the automobile, and may not increase the price of the automobile on the basis that a consumer has secured financing from a third-party lender; 4. A consumer of a second-hand automobile may file a complaint against a second-hand automobile dealer or retrieve the 311 complaint history of a second-hand automobile dealer by calling 311 and referencing the license number of such dealer; 5. A consumer of a second-hand automobile is entitled to a buyer's guide, as required by section 455.2 of title 16 of the code of federal regulations, as well as warranties and rights described in section 198-b of the general business law; 6. A consumer of a second-hand automobile is entitled to specific disclosures, including a disclosure that states the lowest annual percentage rate offered to such consumer by a financing company solicited on the consumer's behalf by a dealer and any fees being charged by the second-hand automobile dealer in connection with the financing of a second-hand automobile; 7. A consumer of a second-hand automobile is not required to purchase any add-on product as a condition of purchasing or financing a second-hand automobile at an offered price; and 8. A second-hand automobile dealer shall provide to a second-hand automobile consumer, in writing, the itemized cost of each add-on product to be included in the retail installment contract, including the monthly and total cost of financing with and without each such add-on product. b. 1. Every second-hand automobile dealer shall conspicuously post a consumer bill of rights in their place of business in a form and manner to be prescribed by the commissioner by rule. 2. Prior to the execution of any sales contract for the purchase of a second-hand automobile, and in a form and manner prescribed by the commissioner by rule, a second-hand automobile dealer shall separately provide a consumer with a copy of the consumer bill of rights, the receipt of which the consumer must acknowledge by signing or initialing in writing. Such dealer shall provide such consumer with a copy of the signed or initialed consumer bill of rights. 3. Every second-hand automobile dealer shall provide the consumer bill of rights to a consumer in the language in which the sales contract was negotiated, provided the commissioner has made a sample bill of rights available in such language. § 20-268.5 Second-hand automobile records and reports. a. A second-hand automobile dealer shall maintain a physical or electronic copy of each of the following documents relating to the sale of a second-hand automobile for six years after the date of execution by the consumer of such documents: 1. The buyer's order, bill of sale, any retail installment contract, and any document incorporated by reference into the bill of sale or retail installment contract; 2. Every document signed or initialed by the consumer in connection with the sale transaction; 3. Every written disclosure provided to, and signed or initialed by, the consumer pursuant to this subchapter; 4. Each signed automobile contract cancellation option document, whether accepted or declined by the consumer; and 5. Each signed document cancelling a sales contract or declining to cancel a sales contract pursuant to an automobile contract cancellation option. b. The department may inspect and audit all records required to be maintained pursuant to this section. c. A second-hand automobile dealer shall maintain a report on consumer use of automobile contract cancellation options in a format to be prescribed by the commissioner by rule. The report shall be made available upon request of the commissioner but in no instance shall such request be made more than once annually. The report shall include: 1. The total number of consumers that accepted an automobile contract cancellation option in connection with their second-hand automobile purchase; and 2. The total number of consumers that canceled their second-hand automobile sales contracts pursuant to an automobile contract cancellation option. § 20-268.6 Legislative recommendations. The commissioner may submit to the council and the mayor a report of legislative recommendations on the regulation of the second-hand automobile dealer industry. Such report, should the commissioner elect to submit it, may address (i) whether it is advisable to create additional enforcement tools to promote compliance with sections 20-268.1, 20-268.2, 20-268.3, 20-268.4 and 20-268.5 by licensees; (ii) the effect such sections have had on the prevalence of predatory practices in the second-hand automobile dealer industry; (iii) whether new predatory practices have emerged in the second-hand automobile dealer industry; (iv) whether additional disclosure or reporting requirements for second-hand automobile dealers would mitigate consumer harm; and (v) the effectiveness of the department's outreach and education efforts in this area. § 20-268.7 Purchase of second-hand catalytic converters. a. Before any dealer in second-hand articles as defined by this subchapter, other than a vehicle dismantler, as defined in section 415-a of the vehicle and traffic law, purchases a second-hand catalytic converter, such dealer must obtain from the seller the following information: 1. The year, make, model and vehicle identification number for the vehicle from which the second-hand catalytic converter was removed; 2. A copy of the certificate of title or other documentation indicating that the seller has an ownership interest in the vehicle described in paragraph 1, or where the seller is the owner of a motor vehicle repair shop, as defined in section 398-b of the vehicle and traffic law, and the second-hand catalytic converter was removed by such owner in connection with a repair of the vehicle, the name and address of the owner of such vehicle and copies of all invoices related to such repair; and 3. The unique identifying number of the second-hand catalytic converter, if any. b. Such dealer must determine that the second-hand catalytic converter is consistent with the manufacturer's specifications for a catalytic converter from the vehicle identified in the information provided pursuant to subdivision a and must document such determination. c. Such dealer shall maintain an electronic record of the information provided pursuant to subdivision a for a minimum of six years from the date of the purchase of the second-hand catalytic converter. Such electronic record shall be created by the dealer at the time of each transaction. Such electronic record shall be maintained in a manner to be specified in rules of the police commissioner, which may include the real-time sharing or accessing of such records in an electronic format and/or through use of an internet website designated by the police commissioner. Such records shall be open to the inspection of officers and employees of the department and officers of the fire department or the police department during regular and usual business hours. § 20-269 Automobile wreckers; fires. The occurrence, as reported by the fire commissioner pursuant to subdivision c of section 27-4249 of the code, of more than two fires during any twelve-month period at a location operated for the salvage, dumping or wrecking of automobiles or parts thereof by a person licensed pursuant to this subchapter, shall be considered by the commissioner as prima facie evidence of the existence of a continuous danger to public health and safety and shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license. § 20-270 Sign for new and second-hand articles. Every person licensed as a dealer in second-hand articles, who also sells new articles within the licensed premises, shall have a sign of not less than two hundred sixteen square inches with letters thereon not less than two inches in height prominently displayed within the department or area where said articles are sold, informing the public that new articles and second-hand articles are sold within said department or area. § 20-271 Labelling of second-hand articles and posting of prices for second- hand automobiles. a. Every person licensed as a dealer in second-hand articles, who also sells new articles within the licensed premises, shall label all second-hand articles in such manner that the public will be informed that such articles are not new. b. Every person required to be licensed as a second-hand automobile dealer pursuant to section 20-265 of this subchapter, who sells second-hand automobiles at retail, shall clearly and conspicuously post: 1. the total selling price, which shall include any administrative, service or other fee charged by the second-hand automobile dealer exclusive of all taxes and fees for securing a registration or certificate of title, of each second-hand automobile offered for sale at his or her place of business, by means of a sign on the dashboard of each such automobile or by means of a sign at the point of display of each such automobile; and 2. the total selling price of any add-on product offered for sale by means of a sign at the point of display of the second-hand automobile for which such product is available for purchase or at each location within the dealer's place of business where any such product is offered for sale. Such sign shall inform consumers that the purchase of any add-on product is optional and that the purchase of an add-on product is not required to obtain financing. c. Nothing in this section shall prevent a second-hand automobile dealer from selling a second-hand automobile or an add-on product at a lower selling price than the price posted pursuant to subdivision b of this section. d. 1. Any person who violates subdivision b of this section or any rule or regulation issued thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than: (a) five hundred dollars for the first violation; (b) seven hundred and fifty dollars for the second violation committed within one year of the first violation; and (c) one thousand dollars for the third or any subsequent violation committed within one year of the first violation. 2. For purposes of assessing penalties in accordance with this subdivision, all violations committed by the same dealer on the same day shall count as one violation. § 20-272 Lost or stolen property. a. If any goods or articles shall be advertised in any newspaper printed in the city as having been lost or stolen, and if any goods or articles answering such advertised description or any part thereof, shall be in or come into the possession of any dealer in second-hand articles, upon receiving written or oral notice to do so, such dealer shall give information thereof in writing to the police commissioner. b. Every dealer in second-hand articles who shall have or receive any goods, or articles lost or stolen, or alleged or supposed to have been lost or stolen, shall exhibit the same, on demand, to the commissioner or departmental inspector, or to any judge of the criminal court, to any police officer, or to any person, duly authorized in writing by the commissioner or by any judge of the criminal court, who shall exhibit such written authority to the dealer. § 20-273 Record of purchase and sales. a. Subject to the provisions of subdivisions b and c of this section, every dealer in second-hand articles shall keep a written record of transactions that shall be legible and written in English. At the time of every purchase and at the time of every sale, every dealer in second-hand articles shall enter in such written record a description of every article so purchased or sold, the number or numbers and any monograms, inscription or other marks of identification that may appear on such article, a description of the articles or pieces comprising old gold, silver, platinum, or other metals, and any monogram, inscription or marks of identification thereon, the name, residence and general description of the person from whom such purchase was made or to whom sold and the day and hour of the purchase or sale. b. In addition to maintaining written records in accordance with subdivision a of this section, every dealer in second-hand articles that deals in the purchase or sale of any second-hand manufactured article composed wholly or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals, or deals in the purchase or sale of any old gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals, or deals in the purchase of articles or things comprised of gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals for the purpose of melting or refining, or deals in the purchase or sale of used electrical appliances excluding kitchen appliances, or deals in the purchase or sale of any used electronic equipment, computers or component parts of electronic equipment or computers, shall with respect to such transactions create an electronic record in English, in a manner to be specified by the police commissioner by rule. Such electronic record may include real-time sharing or accessing of such records in an electronic format and/or through use of an internet website designated by the police commissioner. Such electronic record shall be retained for a minimum period of six years from the date of purchase or sale. Such electronic record shall be created by the dealer at the time of each transaction and shall include the following information: (i) date, time, and location of transaction; and (ii) an accurate description of each article purchased or sold, including the type of article, manufacturer, make, model or serial number, inscriptions or distinguishing marks. Such electronic record may include one or more digital photographs reasonably capturing the likeness of the article, provided in a format or in accordance with specifications as provided by rule of the police commissioner in furtherance of the purposes of this subchapter. c. In the case of a dealer in second-hand articles who deals in the purchase or sale of pawnbroker tickets or other evidence of pledged articles or the redemption or sale of pledged articles and who is not subject to the provisions of section 20-277 of this chapter: 1. Every dealer shall at the time of such purchase, sale or redemption, include the following information in the written record kept pursuant to subdivision a of this section: (i) The name and address of the person who issued such ticket or other evidence; (ii) The pledge number of such pawn ticket or other evidence; (iii) The name and address of the pledgor as it appears upon such pawn ticket or other evidence; (iv) The amount loaned or advanced as it appears on such pawn ticket or other evidence; (v) The day and hour of such purchase, sale or redemption, as the case may be; (vi) The name, residence and general description of the person from whom or to whom the redeemed article is purchased or sold, as the case may be; (vii) The sum paid or received for such pawn ticket or other evidence, or the sum paid or received for the redeemed article or pledge; and (viii) Such description of a pledged article as appears on such pawn ticket or other evidence and an accurate description of every redeemed pledged article. 2. Every dealer shall with respect to such transactions also create an electronic record in English, in a manner to be specified by the police commissioner by rule. Such electronic record may include real-time sharing or accessing of such records in an electronic format and/or through use of an internet website designated by the police commissioner. Such electronic record shall be retained for a minimum period of six years from the date of purchase or sale. Such electronic record shall be created by the dealer at the time of purchase, sale or redemption and shall include the information specified in subparagraphs (i), (ii), (iv), (v), (vii) and (viii) of paragraph one of this subdivision and one or more digital photographs reasonably capturing the likeness of the article, provided in a format or in accordance with specifications as provided by rule of the police commissioner in furtherance of the purposes of this subchapter. d. In the case of a sale or other disposal of a motor vehicle, motor cycle or motor thereof, the dealer in second-hand articles shall, in addition to any other entry required by subdivision a of this section, enter in such permanent record the vehicle identification number of said motor vehicle, motor cycle or motor, the manner in which said motor vehicle, motor cycle or motor was removed from the premises, giving the name, address and date of birth of the person who removes it, the driver's license number of such person and state of issuance if such person possessed a driver's license, the motor vehicle registration number of any vehicle used to tow, remove or transport such motor vehicle, motor cycle or motor, and the destination to which the motor vehicle, motor cycle or motor is being removed. e. The records required by this section, including any electronic records pursuant to subdivisions b and c, shall be open to the inspection of any police officer, the commissioner or any departmental inspector, judge of the criminal court, or person duly authorized in writing for such purposes by the commissioner or by any judge of the criminal court, who shall exhibit such written authority to the dealer. Such records shall also be open to the inspection of any official or other person identified in, or duly authorized in writing pursuant to, any other applicable state or local law. f. A dealer in second-hand articles subject to the provisions of subdivisions b or c of this section shall acquire and maintain in good working order the electronic equipment necessary to create and maintain the electronic records required by this section, including but not limited to a computer with internet connection and a digital camera utilizing a file format designated by the police commissioner. g. Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect or supersede any recordkeeping requirement imposed by or pursuant to any other applicable federal, state or local law. § 20-274 Dealers in old clothes; regulation. Repealed. § 20-275 Violation. a. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this subchapter or any rule or regulation issued thereunder shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor and upon the first conviction be subject to a fine of at least $500 and upon any subsequent conviction be subject to a fine of $1,000, imprisonment of at least 15 days, or both; except that any person who violates subdivision h of section 20-268 shall be subject to a fine of: (i) one thousand dollars for the first offense; (ii) one thousand dollars and/or imprisonment of at least fifteen days for any subsequent offense committed within three years of the first offense; and (iii) shall be subject to suspension or revocation of his or her secondhand automobile license at the discretion of the commissioner for any subsequent violations within such three year period. For purposes of this subdivision, each automobile sold in violation of subdivision h of section 20-268 shall count as a separate offense. b. Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, any person who violates any of the provisions of this subchapter or any rule or regulation issued thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of $175 for the first violation, $300 for the second violation and $500 for the third and any subsequent violation; except that a person shall not be subject to such civil penalty for a first-time violation of section 20-270 or 20-271 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation issued thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within 30 days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-270 or section 20-271 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation issued thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination. c. Any person who violates section 20-268.1, 20-268.2, 20-268.3, 20-268.4, or 20-268.5 or any rule or regulation issued thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $500 or more than $1,000 for each violation. d. The commissioner may suspend or revoke a second-hand automobile dealer license if the licensee violates section 20-268.1, 20-268.2, 20-268.3, 20-268.4, 20-268.5, 20-268.7, or 20-271 or any rule or regulation issued thereunder, provided, however, that the commissioner shall suspend or revoke a second-hand automobile dealer license upon the third violation by the licensee within three years of the first violation. e. The commissioner may order a second-hand automobile dealer to pay to a consumer up to 10% of the full refund amount owed the consumer per day for each day that the dealer fails to cancel the sales contract and provide such refund to the consumer in violation of subdivision e of section 20-268.2. In determining whether to order such payment and the amount of such payment, the commissioner shall consider, but is not limited to, the following factors: 1. Any prior violation of subdivision e of section 20-268.2 by such dealer; 2. Any justification offered by the dealer for the delay in canceling the sales contract and providing such refund; 3. The extent of the delay; and 4. Any particular harm suffered by the consumer as a result of the delay. 1 Rules. The commissioner may promulgate such rules as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter. Subchapter 12: Pawnbrokers § 20-276 Pawnbroker's clerks. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to employ a person under the age of sixteen years to accept or receive any pledge. § 20-277 Reports. a. Every pawnbroker shall create an electronic record in English, in a manner to be specified by the police commissioner by rule. Such electronic record may include real-time sharing or accessing of such records in an electronic format and/or through use of an internet website designated by the police commissioner. Such electronic record shall be created by the dealer at the time of every transaction in which goods, articles and things, or any part thereof, are pawned, pledged or redeemed in the course of business of such pawnbroker. Such electronic record shall be retained for a minimum period of six years from the date of such transaction. Such electronic record shall include the following information: 1. The date, time, location and type of transaction; 2. An accurate description of each article pawned or pledged, including type of article, manufacturer, make, model or serial number, inscriptions or distinguishing marks, and at the discretion of the police commissioner and in furtherance of the purposes of this subchapter, one or more digital photographs reasonably capturing the likeness of the article; 3. An accurate description of each article purchased or sold, including type of article, manufacturer, make, model or serial number, inscriptions or distinguishing marks, and at the discretion of the police commissioner and in furtherance of the purposes of this subchapter one or more digital photographs reasonably capturing the likeness of the article. b. The police commissioner, at such times as he or she may prescribe in a written notice served upon any pawnbroker by a member of the police department, may in addition to the electronic record required by subdivision a of this section require such pawnbroker to report to such commissioner, upon blank forms to be furnished by the police department, a description of all goods, articles or things, or any part thereof, pawned or pledged in the course of business of such pawnbroker during the days specified in such notice, stating the numbers of the pawn tickets issued therefor, the amounts loaned thereon, and such identifying marks as may be on the goods pawned. If such notice from the police commissioner so prescribes, such pawnbroker, until he or she is notified to discontinue so doing, shall keep and furnish on such forms, identifying information regarding any pledgors or persons redeeming any articles pledged or pawned, including name, address, phone number, date of birth, sex, and race or ethnicity. c. Pawnbrokers shall acquire and maintain in good working order the electronic equipment necessary to create and maintain the electronic records required by subdivision a of this section, including but not limited to a computer with internet connection and a digital camera utilizing a file format designated by the police commissioner. d. Records required to be kept by pawnbrokers pursuant to this section shall be open to the inspection of the state attorney general, the state comptroller, any police officer, the commissioner, any departmental inspector, any judge of the criminal court, any person duly authorized in writing for such purposes by the commissioner or by any judge of the criminal court, who shall exhibit such written authority to the pawnbroker, or any other governmental officer or employee authorized by the state or local law. Such records shall also be open to the inspection of any official or other person identified in, or duly authorized in writing pursuant to, section forty-five of the general business law or any other applicable state or local law. e. Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect or supersede any recordkeeping requirement imposed by or pursuant to any other applicable federal, state or local law. f. In addition to any other applicable penalty or sanction, any person who violates any of the provisions of this section or rules promulgated thereunder shall be subject to the penalties set forth in subdivision a of section 20-106 of this chapter. § 20-277.1 Tickets. a. Every pawn ticket issued by a pawnbroker shall include a notation in either of the following forms: not accountable for loss of goods by fire or theft or protected against loss by fire or theft. The commissioner may adopt such rules and regulations to permit words having practically the same meaning as the foregoing. b. Every pawnbroker shall, in every possible way, call attention to the contents of the pawn ticket, including the placing in a prominent position in such pawnbroker's place of business of a sign reading: Read your ticket. c. In every case where a charge is made or a fee exacted for extra care, the pawnbroker shall specifically call the pledgor's attention to the said charge at the time the loan is made, and no such charge or fee shall be allowed unless such pledgor shall sign an agreement to pay such extra charge and the fee for such extra charge, as agreed upon, shall be plainly written on the face of the pawn ticket. d. Every pawnbroker shall place in a prominent position in such pawnbroker's place of business a reproduction of the application for the pawn ticket and the front of the pawn ticket which have been enlarged to twice their normal size, and a reproduction of the back of the pawn ticket which has been enlarged to three times its normal size. § 20-277.2 Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of: (i) one hundred seventy-five dollars for the first violation; (ii) three hundred dollars for the second violation; and (iii) five hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent violation; except that a person shall not be subject to such civil penalty for a first-time violation of subdivision b or d of section 20-277.1 of this subchapter, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of subdivision b or d of section 20-277.1, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. Subchapter 13: Auctioneers § 20-278 License required. Repealed. § 20-279 Fee; bond; fingerprinting. Repealed. § 20-279.1 Refusal to issue or renew, or suspension or revocation based on criminal conviction. Repealed. § 20-280 Requirements for auctioneers. Repealed. § 20-281 Persons acting as auctioneers. Repealed. § 20-282 Advertising. Repealed. § 20-283 Night auctions. Repealed. § 20-284 Sale of jewelry. Repealed. § 20-285 Restrictions. Repealed. § 20-286 Sale of real property; fees. Repealed. § 20-287 Split fees. Repealed. § 20-288 False or fraudulent representations. Repealed. § 20-289 Complaints. Repealed. § 20-290 Marshals exempt. Repealed. Subchapter 14: Industrial Laundries and Industrial Laundry Delivery Formerly Subchapt 14.1 of Chapt 2 of Title 20, amended and renumbered as Subchapt 3-B of Chapt 4 of Title 2. § 20-291 Definition. Repealed. § 20-293 Application; special requirements. Repealed. § 20-294 Fee; bond. Repealed. § 20-295 Transferability. Repealed. § 20-296 General provisions. Repealed. § 20-297.1 Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Industrial laundry. The term industrial laundry means (i) a facility used to provide laundry services to commercial clients, including but not limited to hotels, hospitals, restaurants, gyms and retail laundries, or (ii) a facility used to provide laundry services maintained or operated in connection with any commercial institution, including but not limited to any hotel, restaurant or gym. The term industrial laundry does not include the laundry facilities of any hospital or the laundry facilities of any residential dwelling intended for use exclusively by the owners, tenants or occupants of such dwelling. Industrial laundry delivery. The term industrial laundry delivery means: 1. To transport laundry from a commercial client within the city to an industrial laundry within or outside the city for laundry services; 2. To transport laundry from a commercial client outside the city to an industrial laundry within the city for laundry services; 3. To transport laundry from an industrial laundry within the city to a commercial client within or outside the city after laundry services have been performed; or 4. To transport laundry from an industrial laundry outside the city to a commercial client within the city after laundry services have been performed. Laundry. The term laundry means clothing, apparel, sheets, towels, linens and other fabrics that are intended for laundry services. Laundry service. The term laundry service means washing, drying, starching or ironing laundry for a fee, and includes such services when they are provided along with or as an incident to the rental of clothing, apparel or other fabrics. The term laundry service does not include dry cleaning. Retail laundry. The term retail laundry means (i) a business that provides laundry services to the general public; (ii) a business that stores or collects laundry for laundry services or delivery for the general public; or (iii) a business that offers self-service laundry machinery for direct use by the general public. The term retail laundry does not include the laundry facilities of any hospital or the laundry facilities of any residential dwelling intended for use exclusively by the owners, tenants or occupants of such dwelling. Successor. The term successor means any applicant for a license to operate an industrial laundry that satisfies two or more of the following criteria: 1. The applicant uses the same facility or workforce to offer substantially the same services as the predecessor industrial laundry. 2. The applicant shared in the ownership or otherwise exercised control over the management of the predecessor industrial laundry. 3. The industrial laundry employs in a managerial capacity any person who controlled the wages, hours or working conditions of the employees of the predecessor industrial laundry. 4. At least one of the principals of the applicant is a spouse, domestic partner, parent, stepparent, foster parent, adoptive parent, sibling, stepsibling, foster sibling, adoptive sibling, child, stepchild, foster child or adopted child of any owner, partner, officer or director of the predecessor industrial laundry, or of any person who had a financial interest in the predecessor industrial laundry. 2 License required. a. No person may establish, maintain or operate an industrial laundry without obtaining an industrial laundry license pursuant to this subchapter. b. No person may establish, maintain or operate a business that engages in industrial laundry delivery without obtaining an industrial laundry delivery license pursuant to this subchapter, except that any person who has obtained an industrial laundry license pursuant to this subchapter shall not be required to obtain an industrial laundry delivery license. c. A license issued pursuant to subdivision a or b of this section is valid only for the licensee and location specified on the license. 3 Application. a. An application for a license, or for any renewal thereof, to establish, maintain or operate an industrial laundry or a business that engages in industrial laundry delivery shall be made in writing in such form and manner as the commissioner shall prescribe and shall state each of the following: 1. The name and business address of the applicant; 2. The addresses of all locations at which laundry services will be performed; 3. Whether the application is made for an industrial laundry or a business that engages in industrial laundry delivery; and 4. The number of persons employed by the applicant at the time of the application. b. In addition to the requirements of subdivision a of this section, an application for a license to establish, maintain or operate an industrial laundry shall include the following: 1. A description of the ownership and business structure of the applicant; 2. A written statement listing the categories of commercial clients for which the applicant will perform laundry services, including but not limited to hotels, hospitals, restaurants, gyms and retail laundries; 3. A written statement signed by the applicant certifying compliance with all applicable laws, regulations and rules, including section 20-297.6; 4. A written statement signed by the applicant certifying that there are no outstanding final judgments or warrants against the applicant in any action arising out of a violation of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder; 5. A written statement signed by the applicant certifying that there are no outstanding final judgments against the applicant in any civil, criminal or administrative action involving nonpayment or underpayment of wages; 6. Certificates of insurance evidencing workers' compensation insurance and disability benefits insurance coverage in a form acceptable to the commissioner; 7. A certificate of insurance evidencing commercial general liability insurance, listing the city of New York as an additional insured, that provides coverage for property damage and bodily injury and death in an amount of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 in the aggregate; 8. A written statement detailing the applicant's procedures for complying with the minimum standards of cleanliness and hygiene set forth in subdivision a of section 20-297.6; 9. A written statement detailing the applicant's procedures for maintaining functional separation of laundered and unlaundered laundry, as required by subdivision b of section 20-297.6; 10. If the applicant is a nonresident of the city, the name and address of a registered agent within the city upon whom legal process or other notification of a judicial or administrative proceeding may be served or a designation of the commissioner for such purpose; and 11. If the applicant engages in or intends to engage in industrial laundry delivery, such applicant shall submit any information required to be submitted pursuant to subdivision c of this section that has not already been submitted to the department pursuant to this subdivision. If an industrial laundry licensee intends to engage in industrial laundry delivery during the term of a license, such licensee shall submit any information required to be submitted pursuant to subdivision c of this section before engaging in industrial laundry delivery if such licensee did not submit such information when applying for the industrial laundry license. c. In addition to the requirements of subdivision a of this section, an application for a license to establish, maintain or operate a business that engages in industrial laundry delivery shall include the following: 1. A description of the ownership and business structure of the applicant; 2. The name, business address and business telephone number of all industrial laundries to which the applicant delivers laundry for laundry services; 3. A written statement listing the categories of commercial clients to which the applicant delivers laundry, including but not limited to hotels, hospitals, restaurants, gyms and retail laundries; 4. The make, model and license plate number of each vehicle used by the applicant for delivering laundry; 5. A written statement signed by the applicant certifying compliance with all applicable laws, regulations and rules, including section 20-297.6; 6. A written statement detailing the applicant's procedures for maintaining functional separation of laundered and unlaundered laundry, as required by subdivision b of section 20-297.6; and 7. If the applicant is a nonresident of the city, the name and address of a registered agent within the city upon whom legal process or other notification of a judicial or administrative proceeding may be served or a designation of the commissioner for such purpose. d. In addition to any of the powers that may be exercised by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter or chapter 1 of this title, the commissioner may deny an application for a license or renewal under this subchapter after finding that: 1. The applicant has failed to pay in full any civil penalty imposed in a judicial or administrative proceeding arising out of a violation of this subchapter or any rule promulgated thereunder; 2. An entity to which the applicant is a successor has failed to pay in full any civil penalty imposed in a judicial or administrative proceeding arising out of a violation of this subchapter or any rule promulgated thereunder; or 3. The applicant lacks good moral character. In making a finding that an applicant lacks good moral character, the commissioner may consider, but is not limited to, any of the following factors: (a) Any failure by such applicant to provide truthful and complete information or documentation in connection with the application or other request for information; (b) Any final determination of liability in a civil, criminal or administrative action involving egregious or repeated nonpayment or underpayment of wages or any other illegal act or omission bearing a direct relationship to the fitness of the applicant to conduct the business for which the license or renewal is sought; except that the commissioner shall consider mitigating factors, including (i) the passage of time since such determination of liability or the underlying illegal act or omission, (ii) the severity of the illegal act or omission underlying such final determination of liability, (iii) whether any such determination of liability or other illegal act or omission has been appealed and whether the appeal is pending and (iv) any change in circumstance that might reduce the likelihood of the illegal act or omission underlying any such determinations recurring during the period of licensure; (c) Any prior refusal by the commissioner to issue a license to the applicant to establish, maintain or operate a retail laundry, an industrial laundry, or a business that engages in industrial laundry delivery pursuant to this chapter or to renew any such license held by the applicant; or (d) Any finding that, within the 10 years prior to the submission of the application, a person to which the applicant is a successor has been denied the issuance or renewal of any license pursuant to this subchapter or has had any such license revoked. 4 Fee; bond. a. Before the commissioner may issue a license to establish, maintain or operate an industrial laundry, an applicant shall pay a biennial fee and furnish a bond to the commissioner in the amount indicated in the following schedule, depending on the number of persons employed by such applicant: Number of employees Biennial License fee Amount of bond Five or fewer $340 $500 Between six and 10 $490 $500 Between 11 and 25 $740 $500 Between 26 and 50 $1,240 $1,500 Between 51 and 75 $1,740 $2,500 Between 76 and 100 $1,990 $3,000 Between 101 and 125 $2,240 $3,000 126 or more $2,740 $5,000 b. Before the commissioner may issue a license to establish, maintain or operate a business that engages in industrial laundry delivery, an applicant shall pay a biennial fee of $340 and furnish a bond of $500. c. An applicant furnishing a bond under this section shall execute such bond with two or more sureties or a duly authorized surety company approved by the commissioner and shall make such bond payable to the people of the city. Such bond shall be conditioned on the following: 1. That such applicant will comply with the provisions of this subchapter; and 2. That such applicant will pay to the city any fine, penalty or other obligation within 30 days of its imposition, or any final judgment recovered by any person dealing or trading with such licensee for the loss or conversion of laundry within 30 days from the entry and filing of such judgment. 5 General provisions. a. Each licensee shall attach to all handcarts and pushcarts a label or tag that displays, in letters not less than two inches in height, such licensee's name, address and license number. b. Bills, tickets, cards, advertising or stationery issued or distributed by any licensee shall contain such licensee's name, address and license number. c. Charges to laundry consumers shall state accurately and clearly the name and address of the consumer and computation of the laundry charge. d. Each licensee shall notify the commissioner within 30 days of any sale, assignment or change in ownership of the industrial laundry or the business that engages in industrial laundry delivery. e. Each vehicle used for industrial laundry delivery shall display, in letters no less than two inches in height, the licensee's name, business address and business telephone number and the license number assigned by the commissioner. 6 Additional provisions. a. Minimum standards of cleanliness and hygiene. 1. In addition to complying with section 20-297.5, each industrial laundry licensee shall: (a) Launder all laundry using a detergent that is appropriate for each type of fabric; (b) Handle, store and process laundered and unlaundered laundry in a manner that minimizes the spread of contaminants and keeps laundered articles clean; and (c) Clean all work surfaces at regular intervals. Work surfaces include all surfaces in rooms where laundry is exposed to open air, including but not limited to laundry equipment, work stations, and floors, whether or not it is expected that laundry will come into direct contact with such surfaces. 2. No industrial laundry licensee may represent that laundry services have been provided when such laundry services in fact have not been provided. 3. Each industrial laundry licensee shall develop procedures for complying with the minimum standards of cleanliness and hygiene set forth in paragraph 1 of this subdivision and shall post such procedures in a conspicuous manner in all places where laundry services are processed. b. Functional separation of laundered and unlaundered laundry. 1. In addition to complying with section 20-297.5, each industrial laundry licensee and industrial laundry delivery licensee shall maintain functional separation of laundered and unlaundered laundry in accordance with the following requirements: (a) Each industrial laundry licensee and industrial laundry delivery licensee shall enclose laundry in suitable containers before and after laundering and shall not allow containers that hold unlaundered laundry to be subsequently used for laundered laundry without first having been thoroughly cleaned and sanitized; and (b) Each industrial laundry licensee shall store laundered laundry and unlaundered laundry in separate, clearly marked areas of the facility when such laundry is not actively being processed. 2. Each industrial laundry licensee and industrial laundry delivery licensee shall develop procedures for maintaining functional separation of laundered and unlaundered laundry as required by this subdivision and shall post such procedures in a conspicuous manner in all places where laundry services and industrial laundry delivery are provided. 7 Advisory task force. a. There shall be a task force to advise the council and the mayor on minimum standards of cleanliness and hygiene, procedures to maintain functional separation between laundered and unlaundered laundry and strategies for the enforcement of this subchapter. b. The task force shall be composed of: 1. The commissioner or a designee; 2. The commissioner of health and mental hygiene or a designee; 3. One representative of the retail laundry industry, one representative of the industrial laundry industry and one representative of the industrial laundry delivery industry, to be appointed by the commissioner upon consultation with the council; and 4. One representative of employees of the retail laundry industry, one representative of employees of the industrial laundry industry and one representative of employees of the industrial laundry delivery industry, to be appointed by the commissioner upon consultation with the council. c. The commissioner or the commissioner's designee shall serve as chair of the task force and shall invite representatives of relevant state and federal agencies and industry experts to participate in the meetings of the task force and to provide information and expertise about regulatory and industry matters. d. The task force shall convene on or before June 15, 2018 for a one-year term. The task force shall issue its report and recommendations to the council and the mayor on or before June 15, 2019. The task force shall reconvene on or before June 15 of every fifth year after 2018 to consider and propose updates to minimum standards of cleanliness and hygiene, functional separation of laundered and unlaundered laundry and enforcement of this subchapter. The task force shall issue its recommendations for any changes to the standards and enforcement guidance then existing to the council and the mayor on or before June 15 of every fifth year after 2019. e. The commissioner shall collect the written statements submitted by applicants in accordance with paragraphs 8 and 9 of subdivision b and paragraph 6 of subdivision c of section 20-297.3 solely for the purpose of providing such statements to the task force. Such statements, in addition to information about the number and type of complaints regarding alleged violations of this subchapter received by the commissioner, shall be submitted to the task force by the commissioner on or before June 15 of every fifth year after 2018. 1: Laundries Repealed. Editor's note: Amended and renumbered by and See now Subchapter 14 of Chapter 2 of Title 20. Subchapter 15: Locksmiths § 20-298 Definitions. Whenever used in this subchapter, the term locksmith shall mean a person dealing in the mechanical actions, and the correct operations of all locks, key or keyless, or similar devices, and whose trade or occupation is repairing, servicing, installing, inspecting, opening and closing such locks by mechanical means, other than with the regular key made for the purpose, without altering, marring or destroying the original condition or effectiveness of such locks or similar devices in any shape or manner, or a maker or manufacturer of locks, pressure keys, skeleton keys, pass keys, jigs, or any other mechanical device to aid a locksmith in the plying of his or her trade. § 20-299 License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the business, trade or occupation of a locksmith, or for any person employed in a hotel, apartment house, office building, store, garage, service station, luggage shop, or any other establishment, to perform the duties of a locksmith, without a license therefor. § 20-300 License fee. The fee for a locksmith's license shall be fifty dollars. § 20-301 Regulations. a. It shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensed locksmith to open any lock for which a key or combination may have been lost; or to make any repairs to, or change in, the mechanical adjustment or combination of any lock; or to make any original key or any other device or contraption to open a lock. b. Every licensed locksmith shall keep a book in which he or she is to record: (1) the name and address of every person ordering master keys, keys by number, or ordering the opening of a locked item and the date and time such work was done; and (2) the means relied upon to identify any person ordering the opening of a locked item and to verify ownership of a locked item or authorization to order the opening of a locked item. Such book shall be open at all reasonable times for inspection by the commissioner, any departmental inspector, any police officer, or any person duly authorized by the commissioner. c. Every licensed locksmith, except an itinerant locksmith, who is requested to open a locked item which is located on premises other than where the business is conducted shall, prior to opening such locked item, present a photocopy of the license issued hereunder to any person requesting the opening of such locked item. Every itinerant locksmith shall, prior to opening a locked item, indicate the display of the license issued hereunder to any person requesting the opening of such locked item. d. Every locksmith shall make a good faith effort to: (1) determine the identification of any person requesting the opening of a locked item; and (2) obtain proof that a person requesting the opening of a locked item is the proper owner of the locked item or is authorized to request that the locked item be unlocked. e. Reserved. f. Every locksmith opening a locked item shall obtain the signature or mark of the person requesting the opening of such locked item on a form to be prescribed by the commissioner. Such form shall state, in such manner as the commissioner shall by rule establish, that the person requesting that an item be opened is authorized to open that item. The forms shall be retained by the locksmith in such manner as the commissioner shall require, and shall be available at all reasonable times for inspection by the commissioner, any departmental inspector, any police officer, or any person duly authorized by the commissioner or any judge of the criminal court. § 20-302 Equipment to be listed. Each manufacturer or jobber of devices aiding locksmiths in their trade shall file a list of his or her equipment with the department and with the police department, enumerating in such list all master key blanks, code books, machinery, skeleton keys that open and operate more than one lock and known to the trade as pressure keys, key sets for automobiles, vibrating lockpickers, and all similar equipment in his or her possession. It shall be unlawful to dispose of any such equipment to any person other than a licensed locksmith. § 20-303 Keys to be marked. All keys made by a licensed locksmith shall be stamped with his or her name and address or with the license number issued to him or her by the commissioner. All master keys in addition shall bear the word master, and duplicates shall be made only upon the signed order of the owner of the locks which such keys are designed to operate or his or her authorized agent. Master keys shall be made only by a licensed locksmith. § 20-304 Licenses to be displayed. Every licensed locksmith shall display the license issued hereunder in a conspicuous place where it can be readily seen by anyone entering the premises where the business is conducted. Where the licensed locksmith is not in business for himself or herself but is employed by another, it shall be incumbent upon the licensee and his or her employer to display the license hereunder in a conspicuous place where it can be readily seen by anyone entering the premises wherein the business is conducted. Where more than one locksmith is employed in such premises the license of the person then in charge need only be displayed. In the case of an itinerant locksmith the license shall be on his or her person or prominently displayed upon the working kit he or she may carry or upon any vehicle which he or she may use in the plying of his or her trade or occupation. § 20-305 Prohibition as to itinerant locksmiths. It shall be unlawful for any licensed itinerant locksmith to ply his or her trade or occupation or maintain a stand within five hundred feet of any store or other permanent place of business of a licensed locksmith, or at any other place upon the streets or highways of the city where police regulations will not permit. § 20-306 Proof of qualifications; fingerprinting. a. The commissioner shall require any applicant for a locksmith's license to furnish documentary proof that he or she is a qualified locksmith, and if such evidence is not satisfactory to the commissioner, the commissioner may require the applicant to submit to any examination by at least two licensed locksmiths to be named by the commissioner, to serve without compensation, and such licensed locksmiths, after examining the applicant shall certify in writing to the commissioner whether or not the applicant in their opinion is sufficiently qualified to be licensed as a locksmith. b. The commissioner shall require that applicants for licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter be fingerprinted for the purpose of securing criminal history records from the state division of criminal justice services. The applicant shall pay a processing fee as required by the state division of criminal justice services. Fingerprints shall be taken of the individual owner if the applicant is a sole proprietorship; the general partners if the applicant is a partnership; and the officers, principals, directors, and stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation if the applicant is a corporation. Any person required to be fingerprinted hereunder shall furnish to the department three current passport- size photographs of such person. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the commissioner need not require applicants for licenses required under this subchapter to be fingerprinted if criminal history records concerning such applicants are not available from the state division of criminal justice services. § 20-306.1 Refusal to issue or renew, or suspension or revocation based on criminal conviction. In addition to any of the powers that may be exercised by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter or chapter one of this title, the commissioner, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, may refuse to issue or renew, or may suspend or revoke, a license required under this subchapter if the applicant or licensee, or any of its principals, officers or directors, or any of its stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation has been convicted of a crime which, in the judgment of the commissioner, has a direct relationship to such person's fitness or ability to perform any of the activities for which a license is required under this subchapter or has been convicted of any other crime which, in accordance with article twenty-three-a of the correction law, would provide a justification for the commissioner to refuse to issue or renew, or to suspend or revoke, such license. § 20-307 Exemptions. a. Members of city, state or federal departments, who are assigned to locksmith work wholly within their respective departments or divisions, shall be exempt from the operation of this subchapter. b. No person shall be employed by a duly licensed locksmith as an apprentice or trainee unless such person shall have a trainee-license, the annual fee for which shall be ten dollars, and during the time in which such person is so employed he or she shall be under the direct supervision of said licensed locksmith and such person may perform the duties of a locksmith. Such apprentice or training period shall not exceed thirty-six months. Each such licensed locksmith employer shall be responsible for notifying the department as to the termination or other change in the employment of any such apprentice or trainee. Subchapter 16: Sales Repealed. § 20-308 Definitions. Repealed. § 20-309 License required. Repealed. § 20-310 Application. Repealed. § 20-311 License; term. Repealed. § 20-312 Renewals; term. Repealed. § 20-313 Rules and regulations. Repealed. § 20-314 Fees. Repealed. § 20-315 Stock records. Repealed. § 20-316 Display of license. Repealed. § 20-317 Advertising. Repealed. § 20-318 Resumption of business. Repealed. § 20-319 Exemptions. Repealed. Subchapter 17: Garages and Parking Lots § 20-320 Definitions. As used in this subchapter, the following terms shall mean and include: 1. Garage. A building, shed or enclosure or any portion thereof which has the capacity to hold five or more motor vehicles and which is used to accommodate, store, or keep any motor vehicle for the payment of a fee or other consideration charged directly or indirectly. 2. Parking lot. Any outdoor space or uncovered plot of ground which has the capacity to hold five or more motor vehicles and is used to accommodate, store, or keep any motor vehicle for the payment of a fee or other consideration, charged directly or indirectly. § 20-321 License required; fees; term. a. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, operate or conduct a garage or parking lot without a license therefor issued by the commissioner. b. A license to maintain, operate or conduct a garage or parking lot shall be granted to a person of good character, in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and the rules and regulations of the commissioner. c. The biennial fee for every such license or renewal thereof shall be as follows: 1. For each garage or parking lot which has the capacity to hold not more than twenty-five motor vehicles, three hundred dollars. 2. For each garage or parking lot which has the capacity to hold twenty-six, and not more than fifty motor vehicles, three hundred eighty dollars. 3. For each garage or parking lot which has the capacity to hold fifty- one and not more than one hundred motor vehicles, five hundred forty dollars. 4. For each garage or parking lot which has the capacity to hold more than one hundred motor vehicles, six hundred ninety dollars. d. A commuted license may be issued for a period not exceeding any four months in the year at one-half the fees provided for hereinabove, except that the minimum rate for any such commuted license shall not be less than one hundred fifty dollars. e. Notwithstanding the provisions above, a fee of three hundred dollars shall be paid for a license to conduct a garage or parking lot maintained, operated or conducted under thirty-day permits issued by the city, any agency thereof, or the transit authority. § 20-322 Exemptions. The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the maintenance, operation or conduct of a garage or parking lot: a. by the city or any agency thereof; b. in conjunction with a business for the exclusive accommodation of patrons of such business or the employees of such business; or c. by the owner or lessee of a multiple dwelling for the exclusive accommodation of the tenants or residents of such multiple dwelling. § 20-323 Applications. Each applicant for such license shall file with the commissioner a written application in such form and containing such information as may be prescribed by the commissioner. § 20-324 Rate schedules; change of rates. a. Every applicant for a license to maintain, conduct or operate a parking lot or garage shall file with the commissioner a schedule of rates showing the prices charged daily, weekly, and monthly for parking or storage of motor vehicles. b. Each such licensee shall post conspicuously at the public entrance to the garage or parking lot a sign composed of letters and figures of such size, height, width, spacing, color and description as shall be prescribed by the rules and regulations of the commissioner. Such sign shall set forth the schedule of rates charged, the hours during which such garage or parking lot will remain open for business, and the maximum capacity of such garage or parking lot. Where more than one rate is charged for the parking or storage of a motor vehicle, the letters and figures designating each such rate shall be of the same size and dimensions. c. No licensee shall make any charge for parking or storing in a garage or parking lot in excess of the rates set forth in the schedule filed with the commissioner, unless and until at least sixty days prior to the effective date of such changed rates, such licensee has filed with the commissioner, in writing, such change in rates and has posted such changed rates on signs which conform with the requirements of subdivision b hereof. § 20-325 License not transferable. No license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be transferred or assigned to any person or used by any person, other than the licensee to whom it was issued, nor shall such license be used at any location other than the location stated in such license. § 20-326 Claim checks. Every licensee, at the time of accepting a motor vehicle for parking or storage, shall furnish to the driver of such vehicle a distinctive claim check acknowledging the receipt of the vehicle and showing the date of such acceptance. Every such claim check shall contain the name of the licensee and his or her license number. Such licensee shall not be required to issue a claim check for any vehicle which is parked or stored on a weekly or monthly basis, nor for any vehicle parked in a parking lot where the patrons are permitted to park and lock their own cars. § 20-327 Limitation on number of vehicles; manner of storage. a. No motor vehicle shall be accepted by a licensee for parking, or storage, in excess of the capacity of the garage or parking lot, as shown in the license. Whenever the maximum capacity of a garage or parking lot has been reached, the licensee shall post, at the public entrance thereof, a sign, composed of letters of such size, height, width, spacing, color and description as shall be prescribed by the rules and regulations of the commissioner, stating that such maximum capacity has been reached. b. Vehicles shall be stored or parked on the licensed premises in such manner as shall be prescribed by the rules and regulations of the commissioner, for the purpose of safeguarding persons and property and permitting adequate inspection of the premises. § 20-327.1 Bicycle parking spaces. a. Applicability. 1. i. The operator of every garage and parking lot that has an authorized capacity of one-hundred or more motor vehicles shall provide and maintain parking spaces for bicycles in accordance with the provisions of this section. ii. Two years after the effective date of the local law that added this section, the operator of every garage and parking lot that has an authorized capacity of fifty-one or more motor vehicles shall provide and maintain parking spaces for bicycles in accordance with the provisions of this section. 2. The requirements of subdivisions a through f of this section shall not apply to buildings or parking lots that comply with the bicycle parking provisions of sections 25-80, 36-70 and 44-60 of the zoning resolution of the city of New York. 3. Waiver. The operator of a garage or parking lot subject to the provisions of this section may apply to the commissioner for a waiver from the requirements of this section on the grounds that compliance with this section will result in a violation of otherwise applicable zoning regulations, including, but not limited to zoning regulations determining the number of required automobile parking spaces a garage or parking lot shall have. Prior to applying for such waiver, such operator of a garage or parking lot shall submit to the commissioner of buildings a certification from a registered design professional and other supporting additional documentation as such commissioner may require, including, but not limited to, floor plans and diagrams of the garage or parking lot in anticipation of the waiver application. Upon complete submission of all required documentation, the commissioner of buildings shall within forty days review the documentation submitted by the operator, and shall provide to the operator a written recommendation, of whether compliance would be impracticable because of the requirements of applicable zoning regulations. The operator shall submit such recommendation to the commissioner as part of its waiver application, and the resulting written grant or denial of such application by the commissioner shall be final. b. Bicycle parking spaces in garages and lots. 1. The operator of every garage or lot subject to the provisions of this section shall maintain: (i) racks, hooks, poles or other devices to which bicycles can be secured; and (ii) locks, chains or other devices with which to secure them. Such devices shall enable the garage or lot to park and secure at least one bicycle for every ten automobile parking spaces provided, up to two hundred automobile parking spaces. Thereafter, the garage or lot shall be equipped to park one bicycle for every one hundred automobile parking spaces. Fractions equal to or greater than one-half resulting from this calculation shall be deemed to require parking for one bicycle. Parking garages or lots that permit customers to park and lock their bicycles using the customers' own locks, chains or other devices with which to secure such bicycles shall be required to maintain locks, chains or other devices with which to secure bicycles sufficient to accommodate customers who do not have their own lock, chain or other device with which to secure their bicycles. 2. A bicycle parked in a garage or lot that is subject to the provisions of this section shall be parked at least two feet away from any motor vehicle. 3. Bicycles parked pursuant to this section shall be locked to a rack, pole or other device capable of securing the bicycle, or shall be hung on the wall from a securely anchored rack or hook to which the bicycle frame and at least one wheel shall be locked. Such requirements for racks, poles, or hooks and locks, chains or other securing devices shall not be required where a parking garage or lot provides bicycle parking in a location that prohibits any person other than employees of the facility from parking or removing the bicycle from the garage or lot. c. Bicycle parking racks, hooks, poles or other devices used by garage or lot operators to secure bicycles shall be of sufficient strength and design to resist vandalism and theft. d. Bicycle parking shall be accessible to bicycle owners/operators to at least the same extent as vehicle parking is accessible to vehicle owners/ operators. The operator of a garage or lot subject to this section shall not refuse to provide parking for a bicycle unless there is no room for such bicycle at that time because the total number of bicycles required to be accommodated by paragraph one of subdivision b of this section has been met. e. The operator of every garage and parking lot that is subject to the provisions of this section shall file with the commissioner a schedule of rates showing the prices charged daily, weekly, and monthly for parking and storage of bicycles. f. No operator of a garage or parking lot subject to the provisions of this section shall make any charge for parking or storage of a bicycle in excess of the rates set forth in the schedule filed with the commissioner, unless at least sixty days prior to the effective date of such changed rates, such operator has filed with the commissioner, in writing, such change in rates and has posted such changed rates on signs which conform with the requirements of subdivision h of this section. g. The operator of each garage or parking lot subject to the provisions of this section shall post conspicuously at the public entrance to the garage or parking lot a sign composed of letters and figures of such size, height, width, spacing, color and description as shall be prescribed by the rules of the commissioner. Such sign shall set forth the rate to be charged by such garage or parking lot for bicycle parking, the hours during which such garage or parking lot will remain open for business and the minimum capacity of bicycles of such garage or parking lot. h. Bicycles unclaimed after sixty days shall be considered abandoned property and shall become the property of the operator of the garage or parking lot. i. Within twelve months after the effective date of the local law that added this section, the commissioner shall submit a report to the council regarding the effectiveness of this local law at increasing the capacity of parking for bicycles in garages. Such report shall contain, among other things, the number and location of bicycle parking spaces and rate of usage of such spaces. § 20-328 Unauthorized use. a. Definition. Whenever used in this section, unauthorized use shall mean any and all unlawful act or acts and any activity not expressly permitted by the owner, lessor or operator of any property. b. The commissioner shall receive and investigate complaints concerning the unauthorized use of parking lots during the hours when such parking lots are not in operation. c. Upon due notice and hearing the commissioner shall be empowered to order remedies to cure such unauthorized use including but not limited to requiring that the licensee lock or guard the parking lot when it is not in operation. d. The commissioner shall promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the purpose of this section. § 20-329 Payments of judgments. Every license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation upon the failure of such licensee to pay or satisfy any judgment secured against him or her by anyone who stored or parked a motor vehicle in the garage or parking lot licensed hereunder, provided that such judgment was secured in a court of competent jurisdiction against the licensee for acts of commission or omission with regard to the business maintained, operated or conducted by him or her pursuant to the license issued hereunder. § 20-330 Regulations. The commissioner may promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter. § 20-331 Revocation, suspension or renewal of license. Any license may be suspended or revoked by the commissioner, and any application for a renewal thereof denied, for the failure of the licensee to comply with any applicable provision of law or any rule or regulation duly promulgated by the commissioner. § 20-332 Violation. a. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred seventy-five dollars for the first violation, three hundred dollars for the second violation and five hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent violation; except that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first-time violation of subdivision b of section 20-324, paragraph 1 of subdivision b of section 20-327.1, or subdivision g of section 20-327.1 of this subchapter and any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of subdivision b of section 20-324, paragraph 1 of subdivision b of section 20-327.1, or subdivision g of section 20-327.1 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. b. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this section, a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of section 20-326 or paragraph 2 of subdivision b of section 20-327.1 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The notice of violation for such first violation shall inform the respondent of the provision of law or rule the department believes the respondent has violated, describe the condition or activity that is the basis for the notice of violation, and advise the respondent that the law authorizes civil penalties for such violation and that subsequent violations may result in the imposition of such civil penalties. Any person who violates section 20-326 or paragraph 2 of subdivision b of section 20-327.1 of this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred seventy-five dollars for a second violation and a civil penalty of three hundred dollars for a third or subsequent violation. Subchapter 19: Bingo Licensing Law § 20-338 Short title. This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the New York city bingo licensing law. § 20-339 Definitions. As used in this subchapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: a. Control commission or commission or board shall mean the state gaming commission. b. Bingo or game shall mean and include a specific game of chance, commonly known as bingo or lotto, in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card conforming to numbers or symbols selected at random. c. Authorized organization shall mean and include a charitable or educational non-profit organization or a non-profit organization of veterans or any bona fide religious or charitable organization or bona fide educational, fraternal, civil or service organization or bona fide organization of veterans or volunteer firefighters, which by its charter, certificate of incorporation, constitution, or act of the legislature, shall have among its dominant purposes one or more of the lawful purposes as defined in article fourteen-H of the general municipal law, provided that each shall operate without profit to its members, and provided that each such organization has engaged in serving one or more of the lawful purposes as defined in article fourteen-H of the general municipal law for a period of one year immediately prior to applying for a license under this subchapter, and provided, such organization, if unincorporated, has a membership of not less than twenty-five persons. d. License shall mean a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter and article fourteen-H of the general municipal law. e. Regular bingo game shall mean a game that is played on a card or cards issued to a player upon payment of the admission fee provided in this subchapter. f. Special bingo game shall mean any game which is not a regular bingo game. g. Opportunity shall mean a one-faced chance to participate in a game or games of bingo. § 20-340 Authority of commissioner. The administrative powers granted to the governing body of the city under the provisions of article fourteen-H of the general municipal law, in relation to the issuance, amendment and cancellation of licenses, the conduct of investigations and hearings, the supervision of the operation of the games and the collection and transmission of fees, are hereby conferred upon the commissioner pursuant to the provisions of section four hundred ninety-eight of the general municipal law. § 20-341 Conduct of game of bingo by authorized organizations. It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, upon obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter provided, to conduct the game of bingo within the territorial limits of the city, subject to the provisions of this subchapter, the provisions of article fourteen-H of the general municipal law and the provisions of the bingo licensing law. § 20-342 Restrictions upon conduct of bingo games. The conduct of bingo games authorized by this subchapter shall be subject to the following restrictions: a. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other than a licensee under the provisions of this subchapter, shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available for conducting bingo a hall or other premises for any consideration whatsoever, direct or indirect. b. No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from the operation of such game. c. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of this subchapter shall purchase or receive any supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed under the bingo licensing law or from another authorized organization. d. The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct the same. e. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of two hundred fifty dollars in any single game of bingo. f. No series of prizes on any one bingo occasion shall aggregate more than one thousand dollars. g. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall participate in the management or operation of such game. h. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the management or operation of any game of bingo. i. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any wilful violation of any provision of this subchapter shall constitute and be punishable as a misdemeanor. § 20-343 Application for license. 1. To conduct bingo. a. Each applicant for a license shall file with the commissioner a written application therefor in the form prescribed in the rules and regulations of the control commission, duly executed and verified, in which shall be stated the name and address of the applicant together with sufficient facts relating to its incorporation and organization to enable the commissioner to determine whether or not it is a bona fide authorized organization; the names and addresses of its officers; the place or places where, the date or dates and the time or times when the applicant intends to conduct bingo under the license applied for; in case the applicant intends to lease premises for this purpose from other than an authorized organization, the name and address of the licensed commercial lessor of such premises, and the capacity or potential capacity for public assembly purposes of space in any premises presently owned or occupied by the applicant; the amount of rent to be paid or other consideration to be given directly or indirectly for each occasion for use of the premises of another authorized organization licensed under this subchapter to conduct bingo or for use of the premises of a licensed commercial lessor; all other items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in connection with the holding, operating and conducting of such games of bingo and the names and addresses of the persons to whom, and the purposes for which, they are to be paid; the specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such games are to be devoted and in what manner; that no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to any person for conducting such bingo game or games or for assisting therein except as in this subchapter or article fourteen-H of the general municipal law otherwise provided; and such other information as shall be prescribed by such rules and regulations. b. In each application there shall be designated an active member or members of the applicant organization under whom the game or games of bingo will be conducted and to the application shall be appended a statement executed by the member or members so designated, that he or she or they will be responsible for the conduct of such bingo games in accordance with the terms of the license and the rules and regulations of the commission and of this subchapter and article fourteen-H of the general municipal law. c. In each application there shall be designated one special bingo game, to be played on each occasion under such license, which shall be known as the jackpot game. 2. Commercial lessor. a. Each applicant for a license to lease premises to a licensed organization for the purposes of conducting bingo therein shall file with the commissioner a written application therefor in a form prescribed in the rules and regulations of the control commission duly executed and verified, which shall set forth the name and address of the applicant; designation and address of the premises intended to be covered by the license sought; lawful capacity for public assembly purposes; cost of premises and assessed valuation for real estate tax purposes, or annual net leased rent, whichever is applicable; gross rentals received and itemized expenses for the immediately preceding calendar or fiscal year, if any; gross rentals, if any, derived from bingo during the last preceding calendar or fiscal year; computation by which proposed rental schedule was determined; number of occasions on which applicant anticipates receiving rent for bingo during the ensuing year or shorter period if applicable; proposed rent for each such occasion; estimated gross rental income from all other sources during the ensuing year; estimated expenses itemized for the ensuing year and amount of each item allocated to bingo rentals; a statement that the applicant in all respects conforms with the specifications contained in the definition of authorized commercial lessor as set forth in article fourteen-H of the general municipal law, and such other information as shall be prescribed by such rules and regulations. b. In the event an applicant shall apply for a license for a subsequent year, a recapitulation, in a manner prescribed in the rules and regulations of the commission, shall be made as between said applicant and the commissioner in respect of the gross rental actually received during the preceding license period and the fee paid therefor, and any deficiency of fee thereby shown to be due shall be paid by the applicant and any excess of fee thereby shown to have been paid shall be credited to said applicant, in such manner as the commission by rules and regulations shall prescribe. § 20-344 Investigation; matters to be determined; issuance of license; fees; duration of license. a. The commissioner shall make an investigation of the qualifications of each applicant and the merits of each application, with due expedition after the filing of the application, and if he or she shall determine that the applicant is duly qualified to be licensed to conduct bingo under this subchapter and article fourteen-H of the general municipal law; that the member or members of the applicant designated in the application to conduct bingo are bona fide active members of the applicant and are persons of good moral character and have never been convicted of a crime; that such game is to be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, article fourteen-H of the general municipal law and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the commission, and that the proceeds thereof are to be disposed of as provided by this subchapter and article fourteen-H of the general municipal law, and if the commissioner is satisfied that no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense whatever will be paid or given to any person holding, operating or conducting or assisting in the holding, operation and conduct of any such games except as in this subchapter or article fourteen-H of the general municipal law otherwise provided; and that no prize will be offered and given in excess of the sum or value of two hundred fifty dollars in any single game and that the aggregate of all prizes offered and given in all of such games conducted on a single occasion, under said license shall not exceed the sum or value of one thousand dollars, he or she shall issue a license to the applicant for the conduct of bingo upon payment of a license fee of ten dollars for each bingo occasion; provided, however, that he or she shall refuse to issue a license to an applicant seeking to conduct bingo in premises of a licensed commercial lessor where he or she determines that the premises presently owned or occupied by said applicant are in every respect adequate and suitable for conducting bingo games. b. Issuance of licenses to commercial lessors. If the commissioner shall determine that the applicant seeking to lease a hall or premises for the conduct of bingo to an authorized organization is duly qualified to be licensed under this subchapter and article fourteen-H of the general municipal law; that the applicant satisfies the requirements for an authorized commercial lessor as defined in article fourteen-H of the general municipal law; that the schedule of proposed rentals provides a fair and reasonable return on the applicant's investment; that the applicant has filed a schedule of proposed rentals in accordance with the rules and regulations of the commission and that the commission has approved such schedule as fair and reasonable and as the maximum rentals the applicant may charge to any authorized organization; that there is no diversion of the funds of the proposed lessee from the lawful purposes as defined in article fourteen-H of the general municipal law; and that such leasing of a hall or premises for the conduct of bingo is to be in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, article fourteen-H of the general municipal law and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the commission, he or she shall issue a license permitting the applicant to lease said premises for the conduct of bingo to the authorized organization or organizations specified in the application during the period therein specified or such shorter period as he or she shall determine, but not to exceed one year, upon payment of a license fee of ten dollars plus an amount based upon the aggregate rent specified in the license and determined in accordance with the schedule set forth therefor in article fourteen-H of the general municipal law. c. On or before the thirtieth day of each month, the commissioner of finance shall transmit to the state comptroller a sum equal to fifty percent of all license fees collected by the city pursuant to this section during the preceding calendar month. d. No license shall be issued under this subchapter and article fourteen- H of the general municipal law which shall be effective for a period of more than one year. § 20-345 Hearing; amendment of license. a. No application for the issuance of a license shall be denied by the commissioner until after a hearing, held on due notice to the applicant, at which the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the qualifications of the applicant and the merits of the application. b. Any license issued under this subchapter and article fourteen-H of the general municipal law may be amended, upon application made to the commissioner who issued it, if the subject matter of the proposed amendment could lawfully and properly have been included in the original license and upon payment of such additional license fee, if any, as would have been payable if it had been so included. § 20-346 Form and contents of license; display of license. a. Each license to conduct bingo shall be in such form as shall be prescribed in the rules and regulations promulgated by the control commission, and shall contain a statement of the name and address of the licensee, of the names and addresses of the member or members of the licensee under whom the games will be conducted, of the place or places where and the date or dates and time or times when such games are to be conducted and of the specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such games are to be devoted; if any prize or prizes are to be offered and given in cash, a statement of the amounts of the prizes authorized so to be offered and given; and any other information which may be required by said rules and regulations to be contained therein, and each license issued for the conduct of any game shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where same is to be conducted at all times during the conduct thereof. b. Each license to lease premises for conducting bingo shall be in such form as shall be prescribed in the rules and regulations of the control commission and shall contain a statement of the name and address of the licensee and the address of the leased premises, the amount of permissible rent and any other information which may be required by said rules and regulations to be contained therein, and each such license shall be conspicuously displayed upon such premises at all times during the conduct of bingo. § 20-347 Control and supervision; suspension of licenses; inspection of premises. The commissioner shall have and exercise rigid control and close supervision over all games of bingo conducted under any license issued under this subchapter and article fourteen-H of the general municipal law, to the end that the same are fairly conducted in accordance with the provisions of such license, the rules and regulations promulgated by the control commission and the provisions of this subchapter and article fourteen-H of the general municipal law and such commissioner and the control commission shall have the power and the authority to suspend any license issued by such commissioner and to revoke the same, after notice and hearing, for violation of any such provision, and shall have the right of entry, by their respective officers and agents, at all times into any premises where any game of bingo is being conducted or where it is intended that any such game shall be conducted, or where any equipment being used or intended to be used in the conduct thereof is found, for the purpose of inspecting the same. § 20-348 Sunday; conduct of games on. Repealed. § 20-349 Participation by persons under eighteen. No person under the age of eighteen years shall be admitted to any game or games of bingo conducted pursuant to any license issued under this subchapter. § 20-350 Frequency of games; sale of alcoholic beverages. No game or games of bingo shall be conducted under any license issued under this subchapter and article fourteen-H of the general municipal law more often than on eighteen days in any three successive calendar months; or in any room or outdoor area where alcoholic beverages are sold or served during the progress of the game or games. § 20-351 Persons operating and conducting games; equipment; expenses; compensation. No person shall hold, operate or conduct any game of bingo under any license issued under this subchapter and article fourteen-H of the general municipal law except an active member of the authorized organization to which the license is issued, and no person shall assist in the holding, operating or conducting of any game of bingo under such license except such an active member or a member of an organization or association which is an auxiliary to the licensee or a member of an organization or association of which such licensee is an auxiliary or a member of an organization or association which is affiliated with the licensee by being, with it, auxiliary to another organization or association and except bookkeepers or accountants as hereinafter provided. No game of bingo shall be conducted with any equipment except such as shall be owned absolutely by the authorized organization so licensed or used without payment of any compensation therefor by the licensee. No item of expense shall be incurred or paid in connection with the conducting of any game of bingo pursuant to any license issued under this subchapter and article fourteen-H of the general municipal law, except those that are reasonable and are necessarily expended for bingo supplies and equipment, prizes, stated rental if any, bookkeeping or accounting service according to a schedule of compensation prescribed by the commission, janitorial services and utility supplies if any, and license fees, and the cost of bus transportation, if authorized by the control commission. § 20-352 Charge for admission and participation; charge for other opportunities; amount of prizes, award of prizes. a. No amount other than one dollar, or such minimum fee as may be fixed by the board shall be charged by any licensee for admission to any room or place in which any game or games of bingo are to be conducted under any license issued under this subchapter and article fourteen-H of the general municipal law, which admission fee, upon payment thereof, shall entitle the person paying the same to only two opportunities to participate without additional charge in all regular games of bingo to be played under such license on such occasion, and no charge in excess of one dollar, or such minimum fee as may be fixed by the board, shall be made for a single opportunity to participate in all special games to be played under such license on such occasion. b. Extra regular bingo cards. No less than twenty-five cents shall be charged by any licensee for two opportunities to participate in regular games of bingo to be played under such license on such occasion. If the licensee during any occasion conducts less than three special bingo games, no less than twenty-five cents shall be charged for each opportunity to participate in regular games of bingo to be played under such license on such occasion. All such charges for extra regular bingo cards shall be in addition to the two opportunities purchased as part of the admission provided in subdivision a of this section. c. Special game cards. No less than twenty-five cents shall be charged by any licensee for a single opportunity to participate in each of more than one special bingo game other than the jackpot game and no less than ten cents shall be charged for a single opportunity to participate in any one specified special bingo game, to be played under such license on such occasion. d. Jackpot cards. No less than fifty cents shall be charged by any licensee for three opportunities to participate in the jackpot game, and no less than twenty-five cents shall be charged for a single opportunity to participate in the jackpot game to be played under such license on such occasion. A card or cards permitting the player to participate in the jackpot game shall not be used to participate in any other game of bingo to be played under such license on such occasion. e. Every winner shall be determined and every prize shall be awarded and delivered within the same calendar day as that upon which the game was played. No alcoholic beverage shall be offered or given as a prize in any such game. § 20-353 Advertising games. No game of bingo to be conducted under any license issued under this subchapter and article fourteen-H of the general municipal law shall be advertised as to its location, the time when it is to be or has been played, or the prizes awarded, or to be awarded, by means of newspapers, radios, television or sound trucks or by means of billboards, posters or handbills or any other means addressed to the general public, except that one sign not exceeding sixty square feet in area may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises owned or occupied by a licensed authorized organization, and when an organization is licensed to conduct bingo on premises of another licensed authorized organization or of a licensed commercial lessor, one additional such sign may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises in which the games are to be conducted. Additional signs may be displayed upon any fire fighting equipment belonging to any licensee, which is a volunteer fire company, or upon any first-aid or rescue squad equipment belonging to any licensee, which is a first-aid or rescue squad, in and throughout the community or communities served by such volunteer fire company or such first-aid or rescue squad as the case may be. § 20-354 Statement of receipts, expenses; additional license fees. a. Within fifteen days after the conclusion of the conducting of any game of bingo, the authorized organization which conducted the same, and its members who were in charge thereof, and when applicable the authorized organization which rented its premises therefor, shall each furnish to the commissioner a duly verified statement showing the amount of the gross receipts derived therefrom and each item of expense incurred, or paid, and each item of expenditure made or to be made, the name and address of each person to whom each such item has been paid, or is to be paid, with a detailed description of the merchandise purchased or the services rendered therefor, the net proceeds derived from such game or rental, as the case may be, and the use to which such proceeds have been or are to be applied and a list of prizes offered and given, with the respective values thereof, and it shall be the duty of each licensee to maintain and keep such books and records as may be necessary to substantiate the particulars of each such statement. b. Upon the filing of such statement of receipts, the authorized organization furnishing the same shall pay to the commissioner as and for an additional license fee a sum based upon the reported net proceeds, if any, for the occasion covered by such statement and determined in accordance with such schedule as shall be established from time to time by the department to defray the cost of administering the provisions of this subchapter, article fourteen- H of the general municipal law and article nineteen-B of the executive law. § 20-355 Examination of books and records; examination of managers, etc.; disclosure of information. a. The commissioner and the control commission shall have power to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of: 1. Any licensed authorized organization so far as they may relate to bingo including the maintenance, control and disposition of net proceeds derived from bingo or from the use of its premises for bingo, and to examine any manager, officer, director, agent, member or employee thereof under oath in relation to the conduct of any such game under any such license or the use of its premises for bingo, as the case may be; 2. Any licensed authorized commercial lessor so far as they may relate to leasing premises for bingo and to examine said lessor or any manager, officer, director, agent or employee thereof under oath in relation to such leasing. b. Any information received pursuant to subdivision a shall not be disclosed except so far as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this subchapter, article fourteen-H of the general municipal law and article nineteen-B of the executive law. § 20-356 Appeals from commissioner to control commission. Any applicant for, or holder of, any license issued or to be issued under this subchapter aggrieved by any action of the commissioner to whom such application has been made or by whom such license has been issued, may appeal to the control commission from the determination of such commissioner by filing with the commissioner a written notice of appeal within thirty days after the determination or action appealed from, and upon the hearing of such appeal, the evidence, if any, taken before the commissioner and any additional evidence may be produced and shall be considered in arriving at a determination of the matters in issue, and the action of the control commission upon said appeal shall be binding upon the commissioner and all parties to such appeal. § 20-357 Exemption from prosecution. No person or corporation: (a) Lawfully conducting, or participating in the conduct of bingo, or (b) Permitting the conduct upon any premises owned or leased by him, her or it under any license lawfully issued pursuant to this subchapter and article fourteen-H of the general municipal law, shall be liable to prosecution or conviction for violation of any provision of article one hundred thirty of the penal law or any other law or ordinance to the extent that such conduct is specifically authorized by this subchapter or article fourteen-H of the general municipal law, but this immunity shall not extend to any person or corporation knowingly conducting or participating in the conduct of any game of bingo under any license obtained by any false pretense or by any false statement made in any application for license or otherwise, or permitting the conduct upon any premises owned or leased by him, her or it of any game of bingo conducted under any license known to him, her or it to have been obtained by any such false pretense or statement. § 20-358 Offenses, forfeitures of license; ineligibility to apply for license. Any person, association or corporation who or which shall: (a) make any false statement in any application for any license authorized to be issued under this subchapter or article fourteen-H of the general municipal law; (b) pay or receive, for the use of any premises for conducting bingo, a rental in excess of the amount specified as the permissible rent in the license provided for in this subchapter or article fourteen-H of the general municipal law; (c) fail to keep such books and records as shall fully and truly record all transactions connected with the conducting of bingo or the leasing of premises to be used for the conduct of bingo; (d) falsify or make any false entry in any books or records so far as they relate in any manner to the conduct of bingo, to the disposition of the proceeds thereof and to the application of the rents received by any authorized organization; (e) divert or pay any portion of the net proceeds of any game of bingo to any person, association or corporation, except in furtherance of one or more of the lawful purposes defined in article fourteen-H of the general municipal law; or (f) violate any of the provisions of this subchapter or article fourteen- H of the general municipal law or of any term of any license issued under this subchapter; shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall forfeit any license issued under this subchapter or article fourteen-H of the general municipal law and be ineligible to apply for a license under this subchapter or article fourteen-H of the general municipal law for one year thereafter. § 20-359 Penalties. a. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of: (i) one hundred seventy-five dollars for the first violation; (ii) three hundred dollars for the second violation committed; and (iii) five hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent violation committed; except that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of section 20-346 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder by failing to conspicuously display a license upon the premises where a game is to be conducted at all times during the conduct thereof, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-346 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. b. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of section 20-349 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The notice of violation for such first violation shall inform the respondent of the provision of law or rule that the department believes the respondent has violated, describe the condition or activity that is the basis for the notice of violation, and advise the respondent that the law authorizes civil penalties for such violation and that subsequent violations may result in the imposition of such civil penalties. Any person who violates such section 20-349 or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred seventy-five dollars for a second violation and a civil penalty of three hundred dollars for a third or subsequent violation. Subchapter 20: Public Dance Halls, Cabarets and Catering Establishments Repealed. § 20-359 Definitions. Repealed. § 20-360 Licenses and fingerprinting. Repealed. § 20-360.1 Security guards in public dance halls or cabarets. Repealed. § 20-360.2 Additional security measures for cabarets and public dance halls. Repealed. § 20-361 Issuance and renewal of license. Repealed. § 20-362 Exemptions. Repealed. § 20-363 Fees. Repealed. § 20-364 Posting of license. Repealed. § 20-365 License not transferable. Repealed. § 20-366 Changes in corporate licenses. Repealed. § 20-367 Places closed to public within certain hours. Repealed. § 20-368 Rules and regulations. Repealed. § 20-369 Suspension and revocation of license. Repealed. § 20-370 Independent monitoring required. Repealed. § 20-370.1 Reporting by the department regarding monitoring contracts. Repealed. § 20-370.2 Reporting by licensees of substantiated violations against cabarets and public dance halls. Repealed. Subchapter 21: Sight-Seeing Buses, Horse-Drawn Cabs and Drivers § 20-371 Licensing of sight-seeing buses, horse drawn cabs and horse drawn cab drivers. Legislative findings. The legislative findings heretofore made in relation to the business of sight-seeing buses and horse drawn cabs in the city of New York and set forth in local law number ten of nineteen hundred sixty-four continue to be valid; such businesses are vested with a public interest and their regulation and control continue to be necessary and essential in order to cope with certain evils and hazards which existed in the absence of governmental supervision. The supervision formerly was reposed in the police commissioner, but recent experience and study indicate that jurisdiction over such businesses should be transferred to the commissioner. It is further found that the present number of horse drawn cabs licensed in the city of New York is adequate to meet the public need and demand and should be preserved, unless the commissioner finds that additional licenses are necessary and advisable. § 20-372 Definitions. Whenever used in this subchapter, the following terms shall mean: 1. Owner shall include any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association owning and operating a sight-seeing bus or buses, or horse drawn cab or cabs, and shall include a purchaser under a reserve title contract, conditional sales agreement or vendor's agreement and the lessee of such vehicle or vehicles under a written lease or similar contract provided such purchaser or lessee of sight-seeing bus or buses shall be entitled to obtain in his or her name a license or licenses therefor from the commissioner of motor vehicles of the state of New York. 2. Sight-seeing bus license shall designate the license issued by the commissioner for each sight-seeing bus. 3. Inspection card shall designate the card issued by the commissioner for the sight-seeing bus licensed or horse drawn cab licensed, which card shall display the license number and capacity of such vehicle. 4. Sight-seeing bus shall mean a motor vehicle designed to comfortably seat and carry eight or more passengers operating for hire from a fixed point in the city of New York to a place or places of interest or amusements, and shall also include a vehicle, designed as aforesaid which by oral or written contract is let and hired or otherwise engaged for its exclusive use for a specific or special trip or excursion from a starting point within the city of New York. 5. Horse drawn cab shall mean a horse drawn vehicle operating for hire, so designed and constructed to comfortably seat not more than four adults, or two adults and four children, each of whom is under twelve years of age, or three adults and two children, each of whom is under twelve years of age, in the interior thereof. 6. Horse drawn cab driver shall include any person licensed to drive a horse drawn cab in the city of New York. 7. Horse drawn cab license shall designate the license issued by the commissioner for each horse drawn cab. 8. Horse drawn cab driver's license shall designate the license issued by the commissioner for a driver of a horse drawn cab. 9. Certificate of conformity shall mean that document issued by the Administrator of the United States environmental protection agency pursuant to section 206(a) of the Clean Air Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. § 7525(a), reflecting such Administrator's determination that an engine conforms to emissions standards and other regulations issued under section 202 of the Clean Air Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. § 7521, as well as the terms and the time periods prescribed thereon, and as such laws and such regulations may be amended from time to time. 10. Fleet shall mean a group of vehicles owned or operated by the same person. 11. Sight-seeing bus driver shall mean any natural person who operates a sight-seeing bus in the city of New York. § 20-373 License required; fee; term. a. It shall be unlawful to operate or permit another to operate for hire a sight-seeing bus or horse-drawn cab within the city unless the owner shall have first obtained a license therefor from the commissioner. An applicant for a horse-drawn cab license shall be at least eighteen years of age. b. Fees. The original and renewal license fee for each sight-seeing bus shall be fifty dollars and for each horse-drawn cab shall be fifty dollars. c. The commissioner shall not renew any horse-drawn cab license in the event that he or she shall determine that the horse-drawn cab has not been operated for at least four months during the preceding license year, provided that such failure to operate shall not have been caused by strike, riot, war or other public catastrophe. However, in the event that it is shown to the commissioner by competent proof that the licensee has been disabled through illness or has been unable to operate the horse-drawn cab because of other cause beyond his or her control, the commissioner may renew such license. d. The commissioner may refuse to renew any horse drawn cab license in the event that he or she determines that the holder of the horse drawn cab license has demonstrated a disregard for the provisions of this subchapter as illustrated by repeated violations of such provisions. § 20-374 Granting and transferring of licenses. a. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association, owning or operating a sight-seeing bus, or buses, or horse-drawn cab, or cabs engaging in the business of transporting passengers in, about, over and upon any of the streets, avenues, bridges, highways, boulevards or public places within the limits of the city of New York, shall be issued a license for each bus or cab so operating, provided, however any such person, firm, partnership, corporation or association owning or operating a sight-seeing bus or buses, shall first have obtained a license or licenses, as he or she shall be entitled to receive from the commissioner of motor vehicles of the state of New York as made and provided by law. b. It shall be unlawful for a license, after being issued by the commissioner, to be transferred to any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association for any cause whatsoever, except that licenses for horse-drawn cabs may be transferred with the approval of the commissioner. Upon voluntary sale or transfer of a licensed horse-drawn cab by the holder of a license or his or her legal representative, the licensee shall immediately notify the commissioner of his or her intention to replace such horse-drawn cab, or shall surrender his or her license. If the license is surrendered, the vendee or transferee may make application to the commissioner for the licensing of the horsedrawn cab so purchased. A new license shall then be issued by the commissioner in place of the license so surrendered, provided the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the commissioner that he or she is qualified to assume the duties and obligations of a horse-drawn cab license. c. The commissioner shall issue additional licenses only after conducting a public hearing to determine whether the public convenience, welfare and necessity require the operation of additional horse-drawn cabs. The public hearing shall be called upon his or her own motion or upon written request by any applicant. Notice of such public hearing shall be published in the City Record once a week for two consecutive weeks and shall be mailed to all current licensees. If the commissioner shall determine that additional horse-drawn cabs are necessary and advisable, he or she shall certify the number of new licenses to be granted. Not more than one such public hearing shall be held during any calendar year and the commissioner may refuse to consider any request if it appears that a recent public hearing has adequately considered the question. In making his or her determination, the commissioner shall consider among other things, the income of the driver, the income of the owner, the effect upon traffic, and the public demand. The new licenses which are granted shall be allocated to the then existent licensees in the ratio of the number of licenses held by the licensee to the total number of licenses issued and in effect. If a licensee does not accept his or her allotted number within sixty days, his or her additional licenses shall be allocated in the same manner among the remaining licensees. If the number of additional licenses authorized is insufficient to permit such allocation, then the distribution among those licensees entitled to the smallest number of additional licenses shall be made so that priority shall be given to those who have been uninterruptedly licensed for the longest period. New applicants for such additional licenses shall be considered only when the present licensees refuse to accept their allocation of licenses in the manner provided above. The distribution of such additional licenses to new applicants shall be in the order of their filing, provided however that each new applicant shall not be entitled to more than one such additional license until each new applicant who has filed at the time of distribution and who is otherwise eligible has received one license. d. An owner of a sight-seeing bus company applying for or renewing a license issued pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall first obtain written authorization from the commissioner of transportation for all designated on-street bus stops for the pickup and discharge of passengers in order to be eligible for the issuance or renewal of such license. Sight-seeing bus owners shall, in the event that a written authorization required by this subdivision is modified or revoked by the commissioner of transportation, notify the commissioner within five days of receiving notice of such modification or revocation. e. An owner of a sight-seeing bus company that does not have a written authorization from the commissioner of transportation because such sight-seeing bus company does not require on-street bus stops for its operations, shall provide the department with information on whether (i) such sight-seeing bus company engages in the pickup or discharge of passengers at various locations in the city, and if so, then (ii) such owner of a sight-seeing bus company shall provide to the department a list of all such passenger pick up and discharge locations. § 20-375 License plate. Upon the payment of the license fee the commissioner shall issue a license to the owner of the sightseeing bus or horse drawn cab together with a license plate to be securely affixed to a conspicuous and indispensable part of such sightseeing bus or securely and conspicuously affixed to the rear axle of such horse drawn cab, on which shall be clearly set forth the license number of such sightseeing bus or horse drawn cab. The license plate issued to the licensee may, in the discretion of the commissioner, be a plate of a permanent nature with a replaceable date tag attached thereto, indicating the expiration date of the plate during each license year and the issuance of such a plate with such date tag to a person possessing such a plate, shall be deemed issuance of a license plate. Such license plate and the replaceable date tag to be issued from year to year to be attached thereto, shall be of such material, form, design and dimension and set forth such distinguishing number or other identification marks as the commissioner shall prescribe. The commissioner upon renewal of the license hereunder, may continue the use of the license plate for as many additional license years as he or she in his or her discretion may determine, in which event he or she shall issue and deliver to the licensee a replaceable date tag as evidence of renewal of the license, which shall be attached or affixed in such manner as he or she may prescribe by rule. The failure to affix or display such date tag in a manner prescribed by the commissioner shall constitute a violation of this section. In the event of the loss, mutilation or destruction of any license plate or date tag issued hereunder, the owner may file such statement and proof of facts as the commissioner shall require, with a fee of twenty-five dollars, at the department, and the department shall issue a duplicate or substitute license plate or date tag. § 20-376 Inspection of sight-seeing buses. a. A vehicle shall be licensed as a sight-seeing bus only after it shall have been examined and inspected to determine that it complies with this section, and that it also (1) complies with all the requirements of the vehicle and traffic law of the state of New York, and (2) is certified by the department of transportation of the state, as being safe and properly equipped to operate, or if the department of transportation of the state determines an inspection by that department is not required, is certified by the department of motor vehicles of the state. b. (1) On and after the effective date of the local law which added this amendment, the commissioner shall not issue a sight-seeing bus license to any vehicle that when originally manufactured was not equipped with an engine covered by a certificate of conformity unless an engine covered by a certificate of conformity for the model year applicable to the date on which a sight-seeing bus license application for such bus is submitted to the commissioner, has been installed in such vehicle. (2) The commissioner shall not renew the license of any sight-seeing bus that was licensed as of the date of the introduction of the local law which added this amendment and that when originally manufactured, was not equipped with an engine covered by a certificate of conformity unless an engine covered by a certificate of conformity for a model year no earlier than the model year applicable to the date on which the local law which added this amendment was introduced, has been installed in such bus. (3) The commissioner shall not renew the license of any sight-seeing bus that was first issued a sight-seeing bus license on or after the date of introduction of the local law that added this amendment and before the effective date of such law and that, when originally manufactured, was not equipped with an engine covered by a certificate of conformity, unless an engine covered by a certificate of conformity for a model year no earlier than the model year applicable to the date on which the first sight-seeing bus license renewal application for such bus is submitted to the commissioner, has been installed in such bus. c. The commissioner shall refuse a license to any sight-seeing bus not in compliance with the requirements of this section, any rules promulgated thereunder or with any other laws or rules governing sight-seeing buses, or which is otherwise found to be unfit for operation. Grounds for refusal to issue a license shall include, but not be limited to, installation of an engine which does not meet the requirements of subdivision b of this section, failure to submit a bus or records pertaining to the operation and maintenance of such bus for inspection, installation of an engine not covered by a certificate of conformity in a vehicle which was originally manufactured with such an engine, installation of an engine of any model year preceding the year of manufacture in a vehicle which was originally manufactured with an engine covered by a certificate of conformity and being found to have violated the requirements for diesel fuel-powered sight-seeing buses contained in section 24-163.6 of the administrative code. d. The commissioner may adopt rules (1) requiring the inspection by the department of sight-seeing buses and/or records pertaining to the operation and maintenance of such buses to determine compliance with the requirements of subdivision b of this section and section 24-163.6 of the administrative code; (2) delegating the performance of such inspections to the department of environmental protection; and (3) authorizing the acceptance of the results of inspections consistent with paragraph one of this subdivision conducted by a state or federal agency authorized to conduct such inspections on such buses. § 20-376.1 Sound reproduction on open-air sight-seeing buses. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section the following terms shall have the following meanings: (1) Fleet shall mean the total number of sight-seeing bus licenses issued to open-air sight-seeing buses that are held by one person. A person shall be considered to hold all sight-seeing bus licenses in which: (i) such holder has a direct or indirect beneficial interest; or (ii) a family member of such holder has a direct or indirect beneficial interest. (2) Headphone-limited sound reproduction system shall mean a sound reproduction system that transmits an audio signal, including but not limited to the amplified voice of any guide on an open-air sight-seeing bus, so that the audio signal is audible through personal headphones and is not otherwise audible. (3) Open-air sight-seeing bus shall mean a sight-seeing bus, licensed to operate in New York City, that has seating that is partially or entirely un- enclosed. b. The commissioner shall not issue a new license to any open-air sight- seeing bus that is not equipped with a headphone-limited sound reproduction system. For purposes of this section, a new license is any license issued to a sight-seeing bus that is not a renewal. c. Open-air sight-seeing buses shall be equipped with headphone-limited sound reproduction systems according to the following schedule: (1) By July 1, 2011 no less than ten percent of each fleet; (2) By July 1, 2012 no less than forty percent of each fleet; (3) By July 1, 2013 no less than sixty percent of each fleet; (4) By July 1, 2014 no less than eighty percent of each fleet; (5) By July 1, 2015, every open-air sight-seeing bus in each licensee's fleet shall be equipped with a headphone-limited sound reproduction system. d. The department shall verify by inspection that the required number of open-air sight-seeing buses has been equipped with headphone-limited sound reproduction systems, in compliance with the schedule as set forth in paragraph c of this section. The sight-seeing bus license holder of each fleet required to comply with this section shall provide annually to the department a list of buses that are equipped with the required sound equipment, in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. e. Any sight-seeing bus license holder shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $750 per day for each open-air sight-seeing bus that is required to be equipped with a headphone-limited sound reproduction system in order for the fleet to be in compliance with the applicable percentages set forth in paragraph c of this section and that is not so equipped. Additionally, the commissioner shall suspend the licenses of as many open-air sight-seeing buses as the number of such buses that are required to be equipped with a headphone-limited sound reproduction system as set forth in paragraph c of this section but that are not so equipped. Such suspension(s) shall continue until such time as compliance with paragraph c is complete. f. Beginning on April 1, 2016 the Commissioner shall not renew the license of any open-air sight-seeing bus that is not equipped with a headphone-limited sound reproduction system and shall revoke the license of any open-air sight- seeing bus that is not equipped with a headphone-limited sound reproduction system. g. The commissioner shall promulgate such rules as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. § 20-376.2 Sight-seeing bus drivers. a. It shall be unlawful for an owner of a sight-seeing bus company to employ any person as a sight-seeing bus driver unless that person: 1. Possesses a valid commercial driver's license for the operation of such bus and is not disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to federal law; 2. Has not had their commercial driver's license suspended or revoked two or more times within the past five years; 3. Has not accumulated nine or more points on their driving record for acts that occurred within an eighteen month period, except that a person may be employed as a sight-seeing bus driver if one year has passed since the end of the eighteen month period in which such points were accumulated or the person has reduced the points to less than nine through the successful completion of a motor vehicle accident prevention course; and 4. Has not been convicted of any alcohol or drug-related offense pursuant to article 31 of the vehicle and traffic law or any similar offenses under the laws of any other jurisdiction within the past three years. b. An owner of a sight-seeing bus company is deemed to have complied with subdivision a of this section if such owner provides to the department a copy of the affidavit of compliance submitted pursuant to subdivision c of section 509-j of the vehicle and traffic law. c. Within three business days, an owner of a sight-seeing bus company shall inform the commissioner about any accident involving one of the company's sight-seeing buses that must be reported to the state department of motor vehicles pursuant to section 605 of the vehicle and traffic law or any traffic violation committed by a driver while operating one of the company's sight- seeing buses that could be the basis for the assignment of points pursuant to section 131.3 of subchapter J of chapter I of title 15 of the compilation of codes, rules and regulations of the state of New York. An owner of a sight- seeing bus company shall inform the commissioner as soon as practicable if any driver employed by the sight-seeing bus company is charged with any alcohol or drug-related offense pursuant to article 31 of the vehicle and traffic law or any similar offense under the laws of any other jurisdiction or any criminal offense involving the operation of a motor vehicle. Such owner shall provide the identification of the sight-seeing bus driver involved in the incident, a description of the incident, and, if available, a police report and any summonses associated with such incident. d. An owner of a sight-seeing bus company shall register each sight-seeing bus driver employed by such company and licensed in the state of New York in the license event notification service offered by the state department of motor vehicles. Such owner shall register any driver employed by such company and licensed in any other state that offers a similar service with such other service. Such owner shall record any notification provided by the license event notification service offered by the state department of motor vehicles or other similar service in the record maintained pursuant to subdivision e of this section of the driver who is the subject of such notification. e. An owner of a sight-seeing bus company shall maintain and update a driving record for each sight-seeing bus driver employed by such company. Such records shall be made available, either in paper or electronic form, to the department upon request, in accordance with applicable law. Such records shall include, at a minimum, the following information for the time during which the driver is employed by such company and for the five years preceding the date on which such employment began: 1. Copies of all commercial driver's licenses; 2. The expiration and renewal dates of any commercial driver's license; 3. Any order of suspension, revocation or restoration of a motor vehicle or commercial driver's license; 4. Any traffic violation that could be the basis for the assignment of points pursuant to section 131.3 of subchapter J of chapter I of title 15 of the compilation of codes, rules and regulations of the state of New York, any alcohol or drug-related offense pursuant to article 31 of the vehicle and traffic law or any similar offense under the laws of any other jurisdiction, or any criminal offense involving the operation of a motor vehicle; 5. Any traffic accidents that must be reported to the commissioner pursuant to subdivision c of this section; 6. Any completed driver training courses; and 7. Proof of passage of any physical examinations required to maintain a commercial driver's license. f. All records required to be maintained by the owner of a sight-seeing bus company pursuant to subdivision e of this section shall be updated, at a minimum, once every two months, and shall be maintained so long as a driver is employed with such sight-seeing bus company. The owner of a sight-seeing bus company shall keep on file the records of sight-seeing bus drivers who are no longer employed by the company for a period of one year after such employees' departure. The department may promulgate rules regarding the form and manner in which such records shall be kept. § 20-377 Inspection of horse-drawn cab. A vehicle shall be licensed as a horse-drawn cab only after it shall have been examined and inspected. The commissioner shall refuse a license to, or if already issued, suspend the license of any horse-drawn cab found to be unfit for operation. § 20-377.1 Insurance. a. As a condition of the issuance of a license to operate a horse drawn cab, each applicant shall furnish proof that such horse drawn cab is insured under a liability insurance policy with respect to such horse drawn cab for personal injury or death and for injury to or destruction of property of one or more persons resulting from any one accident of not less than the minimum dollar amount of liability insurance coverage required by vehicle and traffic law to be maintained by owners of vehicles engaged in the business of carrying or transporting passengers for hire. b. The licensee shall notify the commissioner of any modification, amendment, cancellation or substitution of any insurance policy required under subdivision a of this section within ten days of notice to the licensee of such modification, amendment, cancellation or substitution. § 20-378 Periodic inspection. The license department shall cause all sight-seeing buses and horse-drawn cabs now, or hereafter licensed, to be inspected at least once every four months. The date of such inspection and the signature of the person making the inspection shall be recorded upon the inspection card in the spaces provided therefor. § 20-379 Form of inspection card. The commissioner shall prescribe an appropriate form of inspection card for sight-seeing buses and horse-drawn cabs and the manner in which such card and the sight-seeing bus driver's and horse-drawn cab driver's identification cards shall be displayed. § 20-380 Rates of horse drawn cabs. The amount to be charged and collected for the use of a horse drawn cab by one or more passengers shall be the total of the following items: fifty dollars for the first twenty minutes or fraction thereof and twenty dollars for each additional ten minutes thereafter. Such rates shall be indexed for inflation based on the Consumer Price Index every three years. § 20-381 Horse drawn cab driver's license. a. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a horse drawn cab within the city without having a valid horse drawn cab driver's license from the commissioner. b. The biennial fee for each such horse drawn cab driver's license shall be thirty dollars. c. The commissioner shall investigate each applicant as to character and fitness before such license shall be issued. d. A horse drawn cab driver's license shall not be issued or renewed unless the applicant therefor has submitted to the commissioner a certificate issued by the commissioner of health pursuant to section 17-334.1 of the code. e. It shall be unlawful for any owner of a horse drawn cab to permit such horse drawn cab to be operated by a person who does not possess a current valid driver's license issued pursuant to this section. In any prosecution of an owner for a violation of this section, it shall not be necessary to prove that the owner knew or should have known that the driver was unlicensed, and there shall be a rebuttable presumption that such cab was operated with the permission of the owner. f. An applicant who has not previously held a license under this section shall be issued a probationary license upon approval of his or her application. A holder of a probationary license may ride alongside a licensed driver at any time. A probationary license shall be valid from the date of issuance until six months after the date of issuance and may be revoked for any violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to rental horses and horse drawn cabs. Until he or she accrues eighty hours time spent operating a horse drawn cab, a holder of a probationary license shall only be permitted to operate a horse drawn cab at staging areas immediately adjacent to Central Park and on roadways or paths wholly within a New York City park. Following the accrual of eighty hours of time spent operating a horse drawn cab, a holder of a probationary license shall be permitted to operate a horse drawn cab to or from a stable at any time. For the purposes of this subsection a person shall be considered to be operating a horse drawn cab if he or she is holding the reins of a horse attached to a horse drawn cab and directing such horse's movements while the cab is in motion. At the conclusion of six months, if the probationary licensee has accrued no violations under subchapter 3 of title 17 or this subchapter, the licensee shall be issued a horse drawn cab driver's license under the terms of this subchapter. 1 Area and time restrictions on the operation of horse drawn cabs. a. 1. It shall be unlawful for a driver of a horse drawn cab to operate such cab at any time when and where such operation is prohibited. 2. In addition to the time restrictions on the operation of horse drawn cabs as set forth in this section, no horse drawn cab may operate on any street in New York between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., seven days a week. b. (1) Horse drawn cabs shall not be driven or operated in the borough of Manhattan between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Monday through Friday. Horse drawn cabs shall not be driven or operated in the borough of Manhattan between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday except for that area inside or immediately adjacent to Central Park. (2) Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Monday through Friday, between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Saturday, and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Sunday, horse drawn cabs shall not be driven or operated in the borough of Manhattan in the areas bounded by and including the following streets: on the north by West Fifty-seventh Street, on the east by Seventh Avenue, on the south by West Forty-second Street and on the west by Ninth Avenue; and on the north by West Sixty-fifth Street, on the east by Columbus Avenue, on the south by West Fifty-seventh Street and on the west by Amsterdam Avenue. (3) On Saturday between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. throughout the year and on Sunday between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. during the period commencing with the Sunday preceding Thanksgiving until the sixth day of January immediately thereafter, horse drawn cabs shall not be driven or operated in the borough of Manhattan in the area bounded by and including the following streets: on the north by West Fifty-seventh Street, on the east by Fifth Avenue, on the south by West Forty-second Street and on the west by Avenue of the Americas. (4) On New Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, the restrictions set forth in paragraphs one, two and three of this subdivision shall not apply. On the aforementioned days between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:30 p.m., horse drawn cabs shall not be driven or operated in the borough of Manhattan in the areas bounded by and including the following streets: on the north by West Fifty-seventh Street, on the east by Seventh Avenue, on the south by West Forty-second Street and on the west by Ninth Avenue; and on the north by West Sixty-fifth Street, on the east by Columbus Avenue, on the south by West Fifty-seventh Street and on the west by Amsterdam Avenue. (5) At no time shall any horse drawn cab be driven or operated on or in any bridge or tunnel within the city of New York. (6) At no time shall any horse drawn cab be driven or operated on any street below 34th Street in the borough of Manhattan. Columbus Avenue, on the south by West Fifty-seventh Street and on the west by Amsterdam Avenue. (5) At no time shall any horse drawn cab be driven or operated on or in any bridge or tunnel within the city of New York. c. The prohibitions contained in this section shall not be construed to apply to horse drawn cabs which are being driven, without passengers, on a direct route to or from the location at which the horse is sheltered, provided that they are so driven no more than one-half hour prior to the end of any time restriction or one-half hour after the beginning of any time restriction. The driver may be accompanied at such times only by the owner or operator of a horse drawn cab, a stable owner, the driver of a horse drawn cab and driver- trainee, or an employee of an owner or operator of a horse drawn cab or stable owner. d. Where exigent circumstances exist and a police officer or other authorized officer or employee of the department, the department of transportation, or the department of parks and recreation gives notice to the driver of a horse drawn cab to refrain from operating such cab in a specific location at a specific time, such driver shall not operate such cab at such location at such time. For purposes of this subdivision, exigent circumstances shall include, but shall not be limited to, unusually heavy pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the existence of any obstructions in the public space at or near such location, an accident, fire or other emergency situation, or a parade, demonstration or other similar event or occurrence at or near such location. e. This section shall be enforced by the department and the department of transportation, with the cooperation of the department of parks and recreation, the police department, the department of health and mental hygiene and the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. f. This section shall not be construed to permit the operation, parking, stopping or standing of any horse drawn cab in any area at any time where or when such operation, parking, stopping or standing is prohibited by any other law or rule. § 20-381.2 Lighting and safety equipment for horse drawn cabs. a. The commissioner shall promulgate rules requiring that sufficient lighting and reflective materials be provided on horse drawn cabs including sufficient lighting on the rear axle of all horse drawn cabs at the location where licenses are affixed. Such rules shall be enforced in the same manner as the enforcement of rules promulgated pursuant to section 20-384 of the code. b. Every horse drawn cab licensed pursuant to this subchapter of the code must be equipped with an emergency brake system, unaffected by rain or wet street conditions. § 20-382 Unlawful agreements by owners or horse drawn cab drivers. It shall be unlawful for any owner or any horse drawn cab driver to have or make any contract or agreement with any owner of any hotel, apartment house, restaurant or cafe or with the agent or employee of such places, by which such owner or such horse drawn cab driver shall agree to solicit the patronage of any passenger for any such hotel, apartment house, restaurant or cafe. § 20-383 Suspensions and revocations. a. After notice and opportunity to be heard, the commissioner may suspend or revoke any sight-seeing bus license where the holder has failed to comply with any provisions of this subchapter or of the rules promulgated thereunder, or with any other laws or rules governing sight-seeing buses, or which sight- seeing bus is otherwise found to be unfit for operation. Such suspension shall remain in effect until compliance and fitness have been established by the licensee and accepted by the department. Grounds for suspension or revocation shall include, but not be limited to, revocation of one or more bus stop authorizations by the commissioner of transportation pursuant to section 19-175.6 of this code, three or more violations of paragraph 2 of subdivision e of section 20-374 of this subchapter within a two year period, installation of an engine which does not meet the requirements of subdivision b of section 20-376 of this subchapter, being found to have violated the requirements for diesel fuel-powered sight-seeing buses contained in section 24-163.6 of the administrative code, failure to submit a bus for inspection, installation of an engine not covered by a certificate of conformity in a vehicle which was originally manufactured with such an engine and installation of an engine of any model year preceding the year of manufacture in a vehicle which was originally manufactured with an engine covered by a certificate of conformity. The commissioner shall, as soon as practicable, notify the commissioner of transportation of each sight-seeing bus license that is suspended or revoked. b. Any driver of a horse drawn cab found to have committed within any twelve-month period, in the aggregate, at least three violations of this subchapter shall have his or her license suspended by the commissioner for a period of not less than three months. For purposes of this subdivision, all violations written on any one day shall constitute a single violation. c. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision b of this section, any driver of a horse drawn cab found to have committed within any twenty-four month period, in the aggregate, at least five violations of this subchapter shall have his or her license suspended by the commissioner for six months. For purposes of this subdivision, all violations written on any one day shall constitute a single violation. d. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions b and c of this section, any driver of a horse drawn cab found guilty of one violation of subdivision d of section 20-381.1 of the code or sections three hundred fifty-one, three hundred fifty- three, three hundred fifty-five through three hundred sixty-two or three hundred sixty-nine of the New York state agriculture and markets law or who is found guilty of a violation of this subchapter while his or her license is suspended, shall have his or her license revoked. A driver whose license has been revoked in accordance with this provision may not apply for a new license for five years from the date of revocation. § 20-384 Regulations. The commissioner may make and promulgate such rules and regulations and prescribe such forms as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter. Subchapter 22: Home Improvement Business § 20-385 Legislative declaration. It is the purpose of the city council in enacting this subchapter to safeguard and protect the homeowner against abuses and fraudulent practices by licensing persons engaged in the home improvement, remodeling and repair business. § 20-386 Definitions. 1. Persons means an individual, firm, company, partnership or corporation, trade group or association. 2. Home improvement means the construction, repair, replacement, remodeling, alteration, conversion, rehabilitation, renovation, modernization, improvement, or addition to any land or building, or that portion thereof which is used or designed to be used as a residence or dwelling place and shall include but not be limited to the construction, erection, replacement, or improvement of driveways, swimming pools, terraces, patios, landscaping, fences, porches, garages, fallout shelters, basements, and other improvements to structures or upon land which is adjacent to a dwelling house. Home improvement shall not include (i) the construction of a new home or building or work done by a contractor in compliance with a guarantee of completion of a new building project, (ii) the sale of goods or materials by a seller who neither arranges to perform nor performs directly or indirectly any work or labor in connection with the installation of or application of the goods or materials, (iii) residences owned by or controlled by the state or any municipal subdivision thereof, or (iv) painting or decorating of a building, residence, home or apartment, when not incidental or related to home improvement work as herein defined. Without regard to the extent of affixation, home improvement shall also include the installation of central heating or air conditioning systems, central vacuum cleaning systems, storm windows, awnings or communication systems. 3. Building means any structure containing no more than four residences or dwelling units. 4. Owner means any homeowner, cooperative shareholder, condominium unit owner, tenant, or any other person who orders, contracts for or purchases the home improvement services of a contractor or the person entitled to the performance of the work of a contractor pursuant to a home improvement contract. 5. Contractor means any person, other than a bona fide employee of the owner, who owns, operates, maintains, conducts, controls or transacts a home improvement business and who undertakes or offers to undertake or agrees to perform any home improvement or solicits any contract therefor, whether or not such person is licensed or subject to the licensing requirements of this subchapter, and whether or not such person is a prime contractor or subcontractor with respect to the owner. 6. Home improvement contract means an agreement, whether oral or written, or contained in one or more documents, between a contractor and an owner, or contractor and a tenant, regardless of the number of residences or dwelling units contained in the building in which the tenant resides, provided said work is to be performed in, to or upon the residence or dwelling unit of such tenant, for the performance of a home improvement and includes all labor, services and materials to be furnished and performed thereunder. 7. Licensee means a person permitted to engage in the home improvement business under the provisions of this subchapter. 8. Home improvement establishment means any shop, establishment, place or premises where the home improvement business is transacted or carried on. 9. Salesperson means any individual who negotiates or offers to negotiate a home improvement contract with an owner, or solicits or otherwise endeavors to procure in person a home improvement contract from an owner on behalf of a contractor, or for himself or herself should the salesperson be also the contractor, whether or not such person is licensed or subject to the licensing requirements of this subchapter. § 20-387 License required. (a) No person shall solicit, canvass, sell, perform or obtain a home improvement contract as a contractor from an owner without a license therefor. (b) A license issued pursuant to this subchapter may not be construed to authorize the licensee to perform any particular type of work or engage in any kind of business which is reserved to qualified licensees under separate provisions of state or local law, nor shall any license or authority other than that which is issued or permitted pursuant to this subchapter authorize engaging in the home improvement business. § 20-388 Fees; term. 1. The fee for a license to conduct a home improvement business shall be fifty dollars and for each renewal thereof the fee shall be fifty dollars. 2. The fee for issuing a duplicate license or for one lost, destroyed or mutilated shall be ten dollars. § 20-389 License not assignable; posting required; removal. a. No license shall be assignable or transferable. b. A license issued hereunder shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of the licensee. c. Every licensee shall within ten days after a change of control in ownership, or of management, or of change of address or trade name notify the commissioner of each change. d. A duplicate license may be issued for one lost or mutilated and shall bear the word duplicate stamped across its face. e. Commissioner's powers. In addition to the powers and duties elsewhere prescribed in this subchapter, the commissioner shall have power: (1) To appoint an adequate number of assistants, inspectors and other employees as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter, to prescribe their duties, and to fix their compensation within the amount appropriated therefor; (2) To examine the qualifications and fitness of applicants for licenses under this subchapter; (3) To keep record of all licenses issued, suspended or revoked; (4) At any time to require reasonable information of an applicant or licensee, and may require the production of books of accounts, financial statements, contracts or other records which relate to the home improvement activity, qualification or compliance with this subchapter by the licensee provided, however, that said information and production of records is required of him or her pursuant to its regular business and functions under this subchapter. § 20-390 Application; fingerprinting. 1. An application for a license or renewal thereof shall be made to the commissioner on a form prescribed by him or her. 2. A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 3. The application shall be filed only by the actual owner of a business, shall be in writing, signed and under oath; it shall contain the office address of the business; the name and residence address of the owner or partner and if a corporation, trade group or association, the names and resident addresses of the directors and principal officers. 4. The commissioner may require the names and residence addresses of any employees of an applicant, in addition to any other information which he or she may deem advisable. 5. Each applicant shall be over eighteen years of age and of good character. 6. Each applicant for a license or renewal thereof shall submit either (i) documentation satisfactory to the commissioner of the applicant's certification from the federal environmental protection agency, as required by subparts E and L of part 745 of title 40 of the code of federal regulations or successor regulations, or (ii) a signed affirmation that such certification is not required for any home improvement work performed by such applicant, in accordance with the rules of the department. Documentation of a certification submitted with an application for a license or a renewal thereof must include the name, EPA certificate number of the applicant, and the expiration date of such EPA certificate. 7. The commissioner shall require that applicants for licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter be fingerprinted for the purpose of securing criminal history records from the state division of criminal justice services. The applicant shall pay a processing fee as required by the state division of criminal justice services. Fingerprints shall be taken of the individual owner if the applicant is a sole proprietorship; the general partners if the applicant is a partnership; and the officers, principals, directors, and stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation if the applicant is a corporation. Any person required to be fingerprinted hereunder shall furnish to the department three current passport- size photographs of such person. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the commissioner need not require applicants for licenses required under this subchapter to be fingerprinted if criminal history records concerning such applicants are not available from the state division of criminal justice services. 8. Each application for a license to solicit, canvass, sell, perform or obtain a home improvement contract as a contractor from an owner, or for renewal thereof, filed on or after the effective date of the local law which added this subdivision shall contain such information prescribed by the commissioner as sufficient to verify the applicant's compliance with the requirements specified in subdivision four of section seventy-one-a of the lien law. § 20-391 Rules and regulations. The commissioner may make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter, as may be necessary with respect to the form and content of applications for licenses, the reception thereof, the investigation and examination of applicants and their qualifications, and the other matters incidental or appropriate to his or her powers and duties as prescribed by this subchapter and for the proper administration and enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter, and to amend or repeal any such rules and regulations. § 20-392 Fines; issuance, renewal, suspension and revocation of license. a. The commissioner shall have the power to impose a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars upon a licensee and/or suspend or revoke a license or deny an application for the issuance or renewal of a license for any one or more of the following causes: 1. Fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in securing a license. 2. The making of any false statement as to a material matter in any application for a license. 3. The person or the management personnel of the contractor are untrustworthy or not of good character. 4. The business transactions of the contractor have been or are marked by a practice of failure to timely perform or complete its contracts, or the manipulation of assets or accounts, or by fraud or bad faith, or is marked by an unwholesome method or practice of solicitation of business from owners. 5. Failure to display the license as provided in this subchapter. 6. Failure to comply with any demand or requirement lawfully made by the commissioner. 7. When an agent or employee of a licensee has been guilty of an act of omission, fraud, or misrepresentation and the licensee has approved or had knowledge thereof. 8. Violation of any provision of this subchapter or any rule or regulation adopted hereunder or for performing or attempting to perform any act prohibited by this subchapter. 9. Violation of any provision of subchapters one, two or three of title twenty-six or subchapter one of title twenty-seven of this code, or any rule adopted thereunder or for performing or attempting to perform any act prohibited by such subchapters, provided that the commissioner shall suspend or revoke the license of any licensee who continues to work in violation of a stop-work notice or order issued pursuant to section 26-118 of this code. b. In addition to any of the powers that may be exercised by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter and chapter one of this title, the commissioner, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, may refuse to issue or renew, or may suspend or revoke, a license required under this subchapter if the applicant or licensee, or any of its principals, officers or directors, or any of its stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation has been convicted of a crime which, in the judgment of the commissioner, has a direct relationship to such person's fitness or ability to perform any of the activities for which a license is required under this subchapter or has been convicted of any other crime which, in accordance with article twenty-three-a of the correction law, would provide a justification for the commissioner to refuse to issue or renew, or to suspend or revoke, such license. § 20-393 Prohibited acts. The following acts are prohibited: 1. Deviation from or disregard of the plans or specifications or any terms and conditions agreed to under a home improvement contract in any material respect without the written consent of the owner; 2. Making any substantial misrepresentation in the solicitation or procurement of a home improvement contract, or making any false promise of character likely to influence, persuade or induce; 3. Any fraud in the execution of, or in the material alteration of, any contract, mortgage, promissory note or other document incident to a home improvement transaction; 4. Acting as an agent for any owner or any finance or mortgage company to arrange for or to obtain an extension of credit which is used to pay for an owner's obligations under a home improvement contract, unless the instrument evidencing such owner's indebtedness complies with subdivision b of 16 CFR § 433.2 and the licensee complies with section 771-a of the general business law; 5. Directly or indirectly publishing any advertisement relating to home improvements which contains an assertion, representation or statement of fact which is false, deceptive, or misleading, provided that any advertisement which is subject to and complies with the then existing rules, regulations or guides of the federal trade commission shall not be deemed false, deceptive or misleading; or by any means advertising or purporting to offer the general public any home improvement work with the intent not to accept contracts for the particular work or at the price which is advertised or offered to the public; 6. Wilful or deliberate disregard and violation of the building, sanitary, fire and health laws of this city; 7. Failure to notify the commissioner of any change or control in ownership, management or business name or location; 8. Conducting a home improvement business in any name other than the one in which the contractor is licensed; 9. Wilful failure to comply with any order, demand, rule, regulation or requirement made by the commissioner pursuant to provisions of this subchapter; 10. As part of or in connection with the inducement to make a home improvement contract, no person shall promise or offer to pay credit, or allow to a buyer any compensation or reward for the procurement of a home improvement contract with others; 11. Failing to perform work under a home improvement contract in a skillful and competent manner; 12. Procuring a certificate of completion from an owner prior to the actual completion of performance by the contractor under a home improvement contract; 13. Including any provision or clause in a home improvement contract whereby the owner waives or is barred from asserting any rights, claims, defenses or remedies available to an owner under this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant thereto; 14. Failing to comply with subdivision four of section seventy-one-a of the lien law; 15. [Reserved.] 16. a. As a part of or in connection with the inducement to enter any home improvement contract, no person shall promise or offer to pay, credit, or allow to any owner, compensation or reward for the procurement or placing of home improvements business with others. b. No contractor shall offer, deliver, pay, credit or allow to the owner any gift, bonus award or merchandise, trading stamps, or cash loan as an inducement to enter a home improvement contract. c. A contractor may give tangible items to prospective customers for advertising or sales promotion purposes where the gift is not conditioned upon obtaining a contract for home improvement work; provided no such item shall exceed a cost value of two dollars and fifty cents and no owner and/or other person shall receive more than one such item in connection with any one transaction. 17. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no person licensed under this subchapter shall, in connection with any home repair or home improvement, act as an agent for, or advertise, promote or arrange for the services of a lender or its affiliate to secure a home loan or a home improvement loan for or on behalf of an owner. 18. No contractor shall receive payment from the proceeds of a home improvement loan except by an instrument payable solely to the borrower or at the election of the borrower, through a third party escrow agent in accordance with terms established in a written agreement signed by the borrower, the lender and the contractor prior to disbursement. § 20-394 Waiver. No acts, agreements or statements of an owner under a home improvement contract shall constitute a waiver of any provisions of this subchapter intended for the benefit or protection of the owner. § 20-394.1 Right of owner to cancel. A licensee shall furnish a notice to the owner that, in addition to any other right to revoke an offer, the owner may cancel a home improvement contract until midnight of the third business day after the day on which the owner has signed an agreement or offer to purchase relating to such contract or until midnight of the third business day after the day on which the owner receives the notice of his or her right to cancel, whichever occurs later. Cancellation occurs when written notice of cancellation is given to the home improvement contractor. Notice of cancellation, if given by mail, shall be deemed given when deposited in a mailbox properly addressed and postage prepaid. Notice of cancellation shall be sufficient if it indicates the intention of the owner not to be bound by such home improvement contract or offer to purchase relating to such contract. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this paragraph shall not apply to a transaction in which the owner has initiated the contact and the home improvement is needed to meet a bona fide emergency of the owner, and the owner furnishes the home improvement contractor with a separate dated and signed personal statement in the owner's handwriting describing the situation requiring immediate remedy and expressly acknowledging and waiving the right to cancel the home improvement contract within three business days. § 20-395 Duty to furnish estimate. A home improvement contractor or any salesperson, employee or agent of such contractor shall affirmatively disclose that an estimate in writing of the materials and labor necessary for a specific home improvement job is available to any consumer. Upon request, such contractor shall make and furnish to the consumer such estimate. A reasonable fee may be charged for the estimate, which fee shall be disclosed to the consumer prior to the furnishing of the estimate and shall be itemized and reflected in the total estimated contract price. § 20-396 False or fraudulent representation; damages. a. Any contractor, canvasser or seller of home improvements who shall knowingly make any false or fraudulent representations or statements or who makes or causes any such statements to be made in respect to the character of any sale, or the party authorizing the same, or as to the quality, condition, or value of any property offered by him or her for sale, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment not exceeding one year or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars. b. Any person who is induced to contract for home improvements in reliance on false or fraudulent representations or statements knowingly made, may sue and recover from such home improvement contractor or solicitor a penalty of five hundred dollars in addition to any damages sustained by him or her by reason of such statements or representations made by the contractor or by his or her agents or employees. § 20-397 Exceptions. No contractor's license shall be required in the following instances: 1. An individual who performs labor or services for a contractor for wages or salary. 2. A plumber, electrician, architect, professional engineer, or any other such person who is required by state or city law to attain standards of competency or experience as a prerequisite to engaging in such craft or profession, or any person required to be licensed pursuant to article six-D of the general business law to engage in the business of installing, servicing, or maintaining security or fire alarm systems, and who is acting exclusively within the scope of the craft, profession or business for which he or she is currently licensed pursuant to such other law. 3. Any retail clerk, clerical, administrative, or other employee of a licensed contractor, as to a transaction on the premises of the contractor. 4. This subchapter shall not apply to or affect the validity of a home improvement contract otherwise within the purview of this subchapter which is made prior to October first, nineteen hundred sixty-eight. 5. Any home improvement, where the aggregate contract price for all labor materials and other items is less than two hundred dollars. This exemption does not apply where the work is only part of a larger or major operation, whether undertaken by the same or a different contractor, or in which a division of the operation is made in contracts of amounts less than two hundred dollars for the purpose of evasion of this provision or otherwise. § 20-398 Power to investigate. If the commissioner upon reasonable cause should believe that any licensee or any other person has violated any of the provisions of this subchapter or any other law, relating to a home improvement business, he or she shall have the power to make such investigation as he or she shall deem necessary, and to the extent necessary for this purpose, he or she may examine such licensee or any other persons and shall have the power to compel the production of all relevant books, records, accounts, documents or other records. § 20-399 Hearings on charges; decision. No license shall be suspended or revoked nor fine imposed until after a hearing had before an officer or employee of the department designated for such purpose by the commissioner upon notice to the licensee of at least ten days. The notice shall be served either personally or by first-class mail to the licensee at his or her last known address and shall state the date and place of the hearing and set forth the ground or grounds constituting the charges against the licensee. The licensee shall be heard in his or her defense either in person or by counsel and may produce witnesses and testify in his or her behalf. A stenographic or electronic record of the hearing shall be made and preserved. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time. The person conducting the hearing shall make a written report of his or her findings and a recommendation to the commissioner for a decision. The commissioner shall review such findings and the recommendation and, after due deliberation, shall issue an order accepting, modifying or rejecting such recommendation and dismissing the charges or suspending or revoking the license. For the purpose of this subchapter, the commissioner or any officer or employee of the department designated by him or her may administer oaths, take testimony, subpoena witnesses and compel the production of books, papers, records and documents deemed pertinent to the subject of investigation. § 20-400 Judicial review. The action of the commissioner in suspending, revoking or refusing to issue or renew a license may be reviewed by a proceeding brought under and pursuant to article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules. § 20-401 Violations and penalties. 1. a. Any person who shall own, conduct or operate a home improvement business without a license therefor or who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder, with the exception of violations referred to in section 20-396 of this subchapter, or having had his or her license suspended or revoked shall continue to engage in such business, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punishable by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or both such fine and imprisonment, and each such violation shall be deemed a separate offense. b. In addition to the penalties provided by paragraph a of this subdivision and those provided by sections 20-105 and 20-106 of chapter one of this title, any person who violates any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be liable for a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars for each such violation. 2. The corporation counsel may bring an action in the name of the city to restrain or prevent any violation of this subchapter or any continuance of any such violation. 3. Where any violation of this subchapter is found to be willful or where such violation has posed a threat to the health or safety of the owner, the commissioner may order the contractor to pay to the owner an amount which shall not exceed three times the actual amount of any damages sustained by the owner as a result of such violations. § 20-401.1 Violations for operating without a license; seizure; forfeiture. a. 1. For purposes of this section, the term owner shall mean an owner as defined in section one hundred twenty-eight and in subdivision three of section three hundred eighty-eight of the vehicle and traffic law. 2. For purposes of this section, the term security interest shall mean a security interest as defined in subdivision k of section two thousand one hundred one of the vehicle and traffic law. 3. For purposes of this section, the term unlicensed activity shall mean the conduct of any activity for which a license is required pursuant to subdivision a of section 20-387 of this subchapter, without such license. b. Any police officer or authorized officer or employee of the department, upon service on the owner or operator of a vehicle of a notice of violation for engaging in unlicensed activity, may seize a vehicle which such police officer or authorized officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe is being used in connection with such violation. Any vehicle seized pursuant to this subdivision shall be delivered into the custody of the department or other appropriate agency. The commissioner shall hold a hearing to adjudicate the violation underlying the seizure within five business days after the date of seizure and shall render his or her determination within three business days after the conclusion of the hearing. Such determination shall also include a finding as to whether or not such vehicle was used in connection with such violation. c. An owner may obtain release of a vehicle seized pursuant to subdivision b of this section prior to the hearing provided for in such subdivision, if such owner has not previously been found to have engaged in unlicensed activity within a five-year period prior to the violation resulting in such seizure. The vehicle shall be released to an eligible owner upon the posting of an all cash bond in a form satisfactory to the commissioner in an amount sufficient to cover the maximum fines or civil penalties which may be imposed for the violation underlying the seizure and all reasonable costs for removal and storage of such vehicle. d. After adjudication of the violation underlying the seizure, if the commissioner finds that the vehicle has not been used in connection with unlicensed activity, the department shall promptly release such vehicle upon written demand of its owner. e. After adjudication of the violation underlying the seizure, if the commissioner finds that the vehicle has been used in connection with unlicensed activity then: (i) if the vehicle is not subject to forfeiture pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision g of this section, the department shall release such vehicle to an owner upon payment of all applicable fines and civil penalties and all reasonable costs of removal and storage; or (ii) if the vehicle is subject to forfeiture pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision g of this section, the department may release such vehicle to an owner upon payment of all applicable fines and civil penalties and all reasonable costs of removal and storage, or may commence a forfeiture action within ten days after the owner's written demand for such vehicle. f. Any vehicle that has not been claimed by the owner within ten days after adjudication by the commissioner of the violation underlying the seizure shall be deemed by the department to be abandoned. Such vehicle shall be disposed of by the department pursuant to section twelve hundred twenty-four of the vehicle and traffic law. g. 1. In addition to any other fine, penalty or sanction provided for in section 20-401 of this code, a vehicle seized pursuant to subdivision b of this section, and all rights, title and interest therein shall be subject to forfeiture to the city upon notice and judicial determination thereof if the owner of such vehicle has been found liable at least two times within a five- year period for engaging in unlicensed activity, and each of those determinations have included findings that a vehicle was used in connection with such violations. 2. A forfeiture action pursuant to this subdivision shall be commenced by the filing of a summons with a notice or a summons and complaint in accordance with the civil practice law and rules. Such summons with notice or a summons and complaint shall be served in accordance with the civil practice law and rules on all owners of the subject vehicle listed in the records maintained by the department of motor vehicles, or for vehicles not registered in the state of New York, in the records maintained by the state of registration. A vehicle which is the subject of such action shall remain in the custody of the department or other appropriate agency pending the final determination of the forfeiture action. 3. Notice of the institution of the forfeiture action shall be given by first-class mail to all persons holding a security interest in such vehicle, if such security interest has been filed with the department of motor vehicles pursuant to the provisions of title ten of the vehicle and traffic law, at the address set forth in the records of such department, or for vehicles not registered in the state of New York, all persons holding a security interest in such vehicle if such security interest has been filed with the state of registration and which persons are made known by such state to the department, at the address provided by such state of registration. 4. Any owner who receives notice of the institution of a forfeiture action who claims an interest in the vehicle subject to forfeiture may assert a claim in such action for the recovery of the vehicle or satisfaction of the owner's interest in such vehicle. Any person with a security interest in such vehicle who receives notice of the institution of the forfeiture action who claims an interest in such vehicle subject to forfeiture may assert a claim in such action for satisfaction of such person's security interest in such vehicle. 5. Forfeiture pursuant to this subdivision shall be made subject to the interest of a person who claims an interest in the vehicle pursuant to paragraph four of this subdivision, where such person establishes that: (i) the use of the vehicle for the conduct that was the basis for the seizure of the vehicle occurred without the knowledge of such person, or if such person had knowledge of such use, that such person did not consent to such use by doing all that could reasonably have been done to prevent such use, and that such person did not knowingly obtain such interest in the vehicle in order to avoid the forfeiture of such vehicle, or (ii) that the conduct that was the basis for such seizure was committed by any person other than such person claiming an interest in the vehicle, while such vehicle was unlawfully in the possession of a person who acquired possession thereof in violation of the criminal laws of the United States or any state. 6. The department or agency having custody of the vehicle, after judicial determination of forfeiture, shall, at its discretion, either (i) retain such vehicle for the official use of the city; or (ii) by public notice of at least five days, sell such forfeited vehicle at public sale. The net proceeds of any such sale shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 7. In any forfeiture action commenced pursuant to this subdivision, where the court awards a sum of money to one or more persons in satisfaction of such person's interest in the forfeited vehicle, the total amount awarded to satisfy such interest or interests shall not exceed the amount of the net proceeds of the sale of the forfeited vehicle after deduction of the lawful expenses incurred by the city, including reasonable costs of removal and storage of the vehicle between the time of seizure and the date of sale. § 20-402 Official acts used as evidence. The official acts of the commissioner and the department shall be prima facie evidence of the facts therein and shall be entitled to be received in evidence in all actions at law and other legal proceedings in any court or before any agency, board, body or officer. § 20-402.1 Education and outreach. The department shall instruct and conduct public education on the consumer protection provisions of this subchapter, and the necessary licenses and permits that home improvement contractors must obtain to perform certain types of home improvement work, including but not limited to plumbing work, electrical work and the raising, lifting, elevating or moving of a home or building. Such instruction and public education shall be provided to home improvement contractors, homeowners and members of the public at least semiannually. Subchapter 23: Process Servers § 20-403 License required. a. Process server license. It shall be unlawful for any person to do business as, be employed as or perform the services of a process server without a license therefor. b. Process serving agency license. It shall be unlawful for any process serving agency to assign or distribute process to individual process servers for actual service in the city of New York without a license therefore. § 20-404 Definition. a. A process server is a person engaged in the business of serving or one who purports to serve or one who serves personally or by substituted service upon any person, corporation, governmental or political subdivision or agency, a summons, subpoena, notice, citation or other process, directing an appearance or response to a legal action, legal proceeding or administrative proceedings. b. A process serving agency is any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation, other than an attorney or law firm located in this state, or city marshal, who maintains an office, bureau or agency, the purpose of which is to assign or distribute process to individual process servers for actual service in the city of New York. c. For the purposes of this subchapter the service of five or more process in any one year shall be deemed to constitute doing business as a process server. § 20-405 Exceptions. a. The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any employee of any city, state or federal department or agency, who is acting within the scope of his or her employment. b. The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to attorneys duly admitted to practice law in the state of New York. § 20-406 Application; fingerprinting. a. An application for such a license or renewal thereof shall be made to the commissioner on a form prescribed by him or her. b. The commissioner shall require that applicants for licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter be fingerprinted for the purpose of securing criminal history records from the state division of criminal justice services. The applicant shall pay a processing fee as required by the state division of criminal justice services. Fingerprints shall be taken of the individual owner if the applicant is a sole proprietorship; the general partners if the applicant is a partnership; and the officers, principals, directors, and stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation if the applicant is a corporation. Any person required to be fingerprinted hereunder shall furnish to the department three current passport- size photographs of such person. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the commissioner need not require applicants for licenses required under this subchapter to be fingerprinted if criminal history records concerning such applicants are not available from the state division of criminal justice services. c. Each such applicant for a process server license or renewal thereof shall be required to pass an examination satisfactorily. Such examination shall be under the supervision of the commissioner and shall test the knowledge of the applicant concerning proper service of process within the city of New York and familiarity with relevant laws and rules. § 20-406.1 Bond required. a. As a condition of the issuance of a process server license, each applicant for such license or a renewal thereof shall furnish to the commissioner a surety bond executed by the applicant in the sum of ten thousand dollars, payable to the city of New York, and a surety approved by the commissioner. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder, and upon the further condition that the applicant will pay (i) to the city any fine, penalty or other obligation the city imposes relating to a violation of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder, and (ii) to a plaintiff any final judgment recovered in an action arising out of the violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter within thirty days of its imposition. If an applicant is unable to obtain a surety bond as required by this section, and upon the provision of proof satisfactory to the commissioner of such inability, the individual applicant may, in lieu of furnishing such bond, deposit an amount of no less than one thousand dollars in a fund to be established by the commissioner to pay (i) to the city any fine, penalty or other obligation the city imposes relating to a violation of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder, and (ii) to a plaintiff any final judgment recovered in an action arising out of the violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter within thirty days of its imposition. b. A process server licensed under this subchapter who engages in the business of serving process exclusively as an employee of a process serving agency licensed under this subchapter shall not be required to furnish a surety bond. c. As a condition of the issuance of a process serving agency license, each applicant for such license or a renewal thereof shall furnish to the commissioner a surety bond in the sum of one hundred thousand dollars executed by the applicant payable to the city of New York, and a surety approved by the commissioner. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder, and upon the further condition that the applicant will pay (i) to the city any fine, penalty or other obligation the city imposes relating to a violation of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder, and (ii) to a plaintiff any final judgment recovered in an action arising out of the violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter within thirty days of its imposition. § 20-406.2 Responsibilities of process serving agencies. Every process serving agency licensed under this subchapter shall: a. Comply with all applicable state and federal laws; b. Be legally responsible for any failure to act in accordance with the laws and rules governing service of process by each process server to whom it has distributed, assigned or delivered process for service; c. Provide to each process server employed by such agency a written statement indicating the rights of such employee and the obligations of the process serving agency under city, state and federal law. Such statement of rights and obligations shall include, but not be limited to, a general description of employee rights and employer obligations pursuant to laws regarding minimum wage, overtime and hours of work, record keeping, social security payments, unemployment insurance coverage, disability insurance coverage and workers' compensation; d. Keep on file in its principal place of business for a period of three (3) years a statement for each employee, signed by such employee, indicating that the employee read and understood the statement of rights and obligations such employee received pursuant to subdivision (c) of this section. § 20-406.3 Records, Audits. a. Every process server and process serving agency licensed under this subchapter shall retain records in compliance with section 89-cc of the New York state general business law for no less than seven (7) years of each process served. Such records shall be retained in electronic form. Tampering with any such electronic records shall be prohibited. b. A process server licensed under this subchapter who engages in the business of serving process exclusively as an employee of a process serving agency licensed under this subchapter shall not be subject to the provisions of subdivision (a) of this section, but shall be required to comply with all other applicable laws. c. The commissioner shall conduct audits of the information required to be kept pursuant to subdivision a of this section in order to monitor compliance with this subchapter. The commissioner shall conduct annual audits, of the information required to be kept pursuant to subdivision a, for at least 20 percent of the licensed process servers who have certified, pursuant to subdivision d, having served at least one summons, subpoena, notice, citation or other process, directing an appearance or response to a legal action, legal proceeding or administrative proceeding that is subject to the provisions of section 110 of the civil court act. d. By February 1, 2020 and every six months thereafter, each licensed process server shall submit electronically to the commissioner a certification, in a form to be determined by the commissioner, stating whether the licensed process server has served at least one summons, subpoena, notice, citation or other process, directing an appearance or response to a legal action, legal proceeding or administrative proceeding that is subject to the provisions of section 110 of the civil court act within the immediately prior semi-annual calendar year period. § 20-406.4 Educational materials. The commissioner shall develop educational materials to be provided to all process servers and process serving agencies licensed under this subchapter. Such materials shall at a minimum identify the laws and regulations pertaining to service of process in the city of New York. § 20-407 Fee; term. The biennial license fee to be paid by such persons shall be three hundred forty dollars. § 20-408 Rules and regulations. The commissioner may make and promulgate such rules and regulations as he or she may deem necessary for the proper implementation and enforcement of this subchapter. § 20-409 Issuance, renewal, suspension and revocation of a license. a. A license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked or its renewal denied by the commissioner at any time for the failure of the licensee to comply with any rule, regulation or order promulgated by the commissioner. Where a license is suspended or revoked or its renewal denied for the reasons set forth in this section, where a penalty is issued pursuant to section 20-409.1 or where such license holder is otherwise disciplined by the commissioner, the commissioner shall post to the department's website and notify all process serving agencies of the suspension, revocation or denial of renewal of such license, the issuance of a penalty pursuant to section 20-409.1 and the reasons for such suspension, revocation or denial of renewal or issuance of such penalty. Such notification and posting shall occur no more than five days from the date the department has suspended, revoked or denied renewal of such license, or issued such penalty. b. In addition to any of the powers that may be exercised by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter and chapter one of this title, the commissioner, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, may refuse to issue or renew, or may suspend or revoke, a license required under this subchapter if the applicant or licensee, or any of its principals, officers or directors, or any of its stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation has been convicted of a crime which, in the judgment of the commissioner, has a direct relationship to such person's fitness or ability to perform any of the activities for which a license is required under this subchapter or has been convicted of any other crime which, in accordance with article twenty-three-a of the correction law, would provide a justification for the commissioner to refuse to issue or renew, or to suspend or revoke, such license. c. Upon application for renewal of a license issued pursuant to this subchapter, applicants subject to subdivision (a) of section 20-406.3 of this subchapter shall certify in writing compliance with the record keeping provisions of such section. § 20-409.1 Violations and penalties. Any person who, after notice and hearing shall be found guilty of violating any provision of this subchapter, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of chapter one of this title and shall be subject to a penalty of not less than seven hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars for each violation. § 20-409.2 Civil cause of action. Any person injured by the failure of a process server to act in accordance with the laws and rules governing service of process in New York state, including this subchapter and regulations promulgated thereunder, shall have a cause of action against such process server and process serving agency, which distributed or assigned process for service, in any court of competent jurisdiction for any or all of the following relief: a. compensatory and punitive damages, provided that punitive damages shall only be awarded in the case of willful failure to serve process; b. injunctive and declaratory relief; c. attorneys' fees and costs; and d. such other relief as a court may deem appropriate. § 20-409.3 Reporting. Twenty-four months after the local law that added this section becomes effective, the commissioner shall submit a report to the speaker of the council regarding the effectiveness of these provisions on effectuating proper service and improving oversight over the process service industry. Such report shall include, among other things, the results of audits the commissioner has completed of process servers and process serving agencies, including information regarding their compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. § 20-410 Electronic record of service. A process server licensed pursuant to this subchapter shall carry at all times during the commission of his or her licensed activities and operate at the time process is served or attempted an electronic device that uses a global positioning system, wi-fi device or other such technology as the Commissioner by rule shall prescribe to electronically establish and record the time, date, and location of service or attempted service. All records created by such electronic device shall be maintained in an electronic database by the process server, or if such process server is acting exclusively as an employee of a process service agency, by the process service agency, for seven (7) years from the date such record is created. Subchapter 24: Electronic or Home Appliance Service Dealers § 20-410 Legislative declaration. It is hereby declared that the business of servicing electronic or home appliances has become the subject of great abuse. The public has been and is unprotected from unethical and financially unstable service dealers. The necessity for legislative intervention to protect the public and legitimate service dealers is hereby declared as a matter of legislative determination. § 20-411 Definitions. Whenever used in this subchapter, the following terms shall mean: 1. Person means an individual, firm, partnership, trust, association or corporation. 2. Complainant means the customer of a service dealer who has complained concerning an alleged violation of this subchapter, any rule promulgated pursuant thereto, or any practice engaged in by a service dealer or any of his or her employees. 3. Service dealer means a person who within the city of New York: a. advertises that he or she performs repair service on electronic or home appliances, or makes public statements reasonably calculated to lead an ordinary consumer to believe that he or she performs such repair service; b. solicits or bills a customer for repair service on electronic or home appliances; c. sells service contracts or maintenance agreements for the performance of repair service on electronic or home appliances and accepts requests for such repair service under such service contracts or maintenance agreements; d. accepts requests for repair service or receives electronic or home appliances for the performance of repair service; or e. provides, as part of a sales transaction, repair service, including repair service performed by the seller, subcontractor, or other service repairer; provided, however, that the term service dealer shall apply to a manufacturer of electronic or home appliances only when such manufacturer acting as a retailer engages in any of the activities described in this subdivision. 4. Repair service or repair servicing means the installation, maintenance, repair, replacement, testing, inspection or modification for compensation, other consideration or under a warranty, of electronic or home appliances. 5. Electronic or home appliance means any electronic device, or any appliance, that is commonly used in a household, including, but not limited to, televisions, radios, stereo systems, compact disc players, home computer systems, telephones, telephone answering machines, satellite dishes, cameras, calculators, video recorders or players, camcorders or other portable video recording devices, cassette recorders or players, facsimile machines, portable photocopiers, air conditioners, clothes washing machines, clothes dryers, dishwashers, food freezes, refrigerators, stoves, ranges, ovens, microwave ovens or sewing machines. 6. Service repairer means a person who performs repair service on electronic or home appliances. § 20-412 License required. 1. No person shall represent or hold himself or herself out to be, or engage in business as, a service dealer, unless duly licensed pursuant to this subchapter. 2. The commissioner shall require that applicants for licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter be fingerprinted for the purpose of securing criminal history records from the state division of criminal justice services. The applicant shall pay a processing fee as required by the state division of criminal justice services. Fingerprints shall be taken of the individual owner if the applicant is a sole proprietorship; the general partners if the applicant is a partnership; and the officers, principals, directors, and stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation if the applicant is a corporation. Any person required to be fingerprinted hereunder shall furnish to the department three current passport- size photographs of such person. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the commissioner need not require applicants for licenses required under this subchapter to be fingerprinted if criminal history records concerning such applicants are not available from the state division of criminal justice services. § 20-413 Licenses generally. No license shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant or licensee is of good moral character and complies with all requirements governing the operation of the affected business which the commissioner prescribes by regulation. § 20-414 Fees. The biennial fee for a license or a renewal thereof shall be three hundred and forty dollars. § 20-415 Penalties. a. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of: (i) one hundred seventy-five dollars for the first violation; (ii) three hundred dollars for the second violation; and (iii) five hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent violation. b. Notwithstanding subdivision a of this section, a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of subdivision 6 of section 20-417 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of subdivision 6 of section 20-417 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. c. Notwithstanding subdivision a of this section, the civil penalty for a violation of subdivision 7 of section 20-417 or any rule promulgated pursuant thereto shall be five hundred dollars. § 20-416 Permit required for service dealer manager. Repealed. § 20-417 Duties of licensees. 1. All work done by a service dealer shall be recorded on an invoice which shall contain the license number and such other detail as may be required by regulations promulgated by the commissioner. The invoice shall fully, separately and clearly describe all service work performed, all parts supplied, the date or dates thereof, and all charges made and the computations thereof. One copy of the invoice shall be delivered to the customer and one copy shall be retained by the service dealer for a period of at least three years from the date of such delivery. 2. The service dealer shall return all replaced parts to the customer, except such parts as may be exempted from this requirement by regulations of the commissioner and except such parts as the service dealer requires for return to the manufacturer or distributor under a warranty arrangement. 3. The service dealer shall comply with regulations promulgated by the commissioner setting forth requirements for estimates or the making of such estimates and shall inform the customer as to the cost thereof prior to rendering same. 4. A service dealer shall not make the remuneration, salary, wage, or other compensation of any employee, partner, officer or member contingent or dependent upon, or in any manner determined by the value, price, quantity or type of parts replaced, upon any apparatus serviced or repaired by any person required to be licensed by this subchapter. 5. A service dealer shall maintain such additional records as are required by regulations adopted by the commissioner to carry out the provisions of this subchapter. Such records shall be open and available for reasonable inspection by the commissioner or other law enforcement officials, and shall be kept for a period of three years. 6. A service dealer shall display in the area where electronic and home appliances are accepted for repair a sign that contains the identity of the service dealer, informs the customer of the customer's right to a written estimate of all repairs and indicates that no repair work may be done without the customer's authorization, in addition to any other information required by the commissioner. The commissioner shall promulgate such regulations as the commissioner determines necessary and appropriate for the proper implementation and enforcement of this subdivision. 7. A licensee shall at all times carry insurance which in the opinion of the commissioner is adequate to protect the public. The commissioner shall promulgate such regulations as the commissioner determines necessary and appropriate for the proper implementation and enforcement of this subdivision. § 20-418 Regulations. The commissioner shall make such regulations as deemed necessary for the proper implementation and enforcement of this subchapter. § 20-419 License denial; right to hearing. No license may be denied for failure to meet any requirement established by this subchapter or by the commissioner without a hearing. § 20-420 Issuance, renewal, revocation and suspension of license; fines. In addition to any powers of the commissioner, and not in limitation thereof, a license required pursuant to this subchapter may be suspended or revoked or issuance or renewal thereof denied by the commissioner, and the licensee may be fined pursuant to subdivision e of section 20-104 of chapter one of this title, upon a determination made by the commissioner or the commissioner's designee after due notice and hearing, that an applicant or a licensee, any of its principals, officers or directors, or any of its stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation: (a) has practiced fraud or misrepresentation upon a customer; (b) has practiced fraud or misrepresentation in establishing his or her qualifications for a license under this subchapter; (c) has aided or abetted another in practicing fraud or misrepresentation upon a customer or in establishing qualifications for a license under this subchapter; (d) has engaged in or has aided or abetted another in engaging in untrue, misleading or deceptive advertising, or unlawful selling practices as defined by the laws of this state, municipality or other local governmental unit within which such advertising or practices occurred; (e) is incompetent or untrustworthy and is thereby unfit to discharge the responsibilities of a licensee; (f) has failed upon request to render to the customer an itemized bill, in writing, containing such details as may be required by the rules of the department; (g) has been convicted of a crime which, in the judgment of the commissioner, has a direct relationship to such person's fitness or ability to perform any of the activities for which a license is required under this subchapter or has been convicted of any other crime which, in accordance with article twenty-three-a of the correction law, would provide a justification for the commissioner to refuse to issue or renew, or to suspend or revoke, such license; (h) has violated any of the provisions of this title, subchapter or the rules promulgated thereunder, or has knowingly caused, permitted, aided or abetted another in committing such violation. § 20-421 Informal adjustment of complaints. 1. The commissioner shall receive complaints from the public against any person issued a license pursuant to this subchapter. 2. The commissioner shall make a summary investigation of the facts. 3. After investigation, the commissioner may advise the licensee of the contents of the complaint and may recommend measures that would compensate the complainant for any damages suffered as a result of the conduct of the licensee or make recommendations which otherwise may reasonably dispose of the complaint. If the licensee accepts the commissioner's recommendations and performs accordingly, such fact shall be given due consideration in any subsequent disciplinary proceedings instituted by the commissioner. If the licensee declines to accept the recommendations of the commissioner and to perform accordingly, the commissioner may investigate further or may institute a departmental hearing with respect to the complaint, and may thereafter require the licensee to make proper restitution to the complainant and may also take such disciplinary action as provided in this subchapter. 4. If the licensee accepts the recommendations of the commissioner and is willing to perform accordingly, but the complainant refuses to accept such recommendations, the commissioner shall not be required to take further action with respect to the complaint. § 20-422 Powers and duties of the commissioner. 1. In addition to any other powers of the commissioner, and not in limitation thereof, the commissioner shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, to investigate any violation thereof, and to investigate the business, business practices and business methods of any person who is or may be subject to this subchapter, if in the opinion of the commissioner, such investigation is warranted. Each person shall be obliged upon the request of the commissioner, to supply such information as may be required concerning the business, business practices or business methods or the proposed business practices or business methods. 2. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this subchapter and in conducting investigations relating to any violation thereof, and for the purpose of investigating the character, competence and integrity of any person who is or may be subject to this subchapter, and the business, business practices and business methods thereof, the commissioner, or commissioner's designee shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and records, in accordance with the provisions of the civil practice law and rules. However, no information supplied by any person at the request of the commissioner concerning his or her business, business practices or business methods, or proposed business practices or methods shall be disclosed, except as may be necessary for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this subchapter. 3. The commissioner may establish and properly equip an electronic or home appliance laboratory for the purpose of testing the competence and integrity of licensed service dealers, whenever complaints against such licensees would indicate the necessity or advisability for such testing, and such laboratory may be further used in the necessary investigations that may be conducted by the commissioner in connection with the proper administration and enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter and the rules adopted thereunder. § 20-423 Review. The provisions of article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules shall be applicable to this subchapter. § 20-424 Exceptions. This subchapter shall not apply to any of the following: 1. the government of the United States or any department or agency thereof; 2. any school, public or private, offering as part of a vocational education program, courses and training in repair service and the instructors and teachers thereof; provided the exclusion granted herein shall be applicable only to repair service rendered in and as part of a regularly constituted vocational education program and when such repair service is not offered to the public for compensation or other consideration. Subchapter 25: Products for the Disabled; Sale, Rental, Repair and Servicing § 20-425 Definitions. Whenever used in this subchapter the following terms shall mean: a. Disabled means a person who has a physical or medical impairment resulting from anatomical or physiological conditions which prevents the exercise of a normal bodily function or is demonstrable by medically accepted clinical or laboratory diagnostic techniques. b. Products for the Disabled means any instrument or device either represented as an aid for or designed specifically or substantially for the disabled. This includes but is not limited to: braces, crutches, prosthetic devices, ostomy supplies and equipment, orthotic devices, self-help aids and wheelchairs. This subchapter does not apply to prosthetic dental devices, or any product, instrument or device the manufacturing, retailing or distribution of which is licensed by any other state or local law. c. Person means any firm, partnership, association, corporation or individual. d. Dealer means any person who engages in a business which substantially involves the selling, renting, repairing, or adjusting of products for the disabled, and who is not licensed or registered by any other state or local law. e. Repair and Service includes repair, adjustment, modification, maintenance, removal or installation of any integral parts, attachments or accessories to products for the disabled, whether done for compensation, other consideration, or under a warranty. f. Written Estimate means a signed writing containing: 1. a listing of the parts to be replaced and the cost of the replacements; and 2. a general description of the labor required for the repair and its cost; and 3. a statement of additional charges, if any, for the estimate, any service call, or any other extra charge excluding tax; and 4. the promised date of completion of the repair or delivery of purchased goods; and 5. a form statement that the final cost, excluding tax, will not exceed the estimated cost by more than twenty percent. This statement need not be given if the final cost, excluding tax, will not be more than the estimated cost. g. Final Bill means a signed writing containing: 1. an itemization of each replacement part, including a description by make and model or serial number or by class and type or such other description as will reasonably identify each part, and including the charge for each replacement part; and 2. a statement of the labor required for the repair and the total cost of such labor; and 3. a statement of additional charges, if any, for the estimate, pickup and delivery, service charge and any other charges. § 20-426 License required. a. It shall be unlawful for any dealer to engage in the selling, renting, fitting, repairing, or servicing of, or making adjustments to, products for the disabled without a license therefor. b. An application for a license shall be made to the commissioner. c. Any person maintaining more than one facility where such services are performed may file a single application for a license, but must pay a separate fee for each facility. d. If the business is to be carried on under a fictitious name, such name shall be stated on the application for a license. If the dealer is a partnership, any identifying data prescribed by the commissioner must be stated for each partner. If the dealer is a corporation, data as to each of the officers and directors as well as the individual in charge of each place of business must be included. e. A license issued under this subchapter is not assignable or transferable. f. Every license issued under this subchapter must be posted conspicuously on the licensee's premises and must be accessible for inspection by any interested person. § 20-427 Fees. The annual license fee shall be one hundred dollars. § 20-428 Denial of license. The commissioner may deny or refuse to renew a license if any applicant, partner, officer or director identified in the application for a license: a. Previously held a license issued under this subchapter which was revoked or suspended without the terms of the suspension being fulfilled; b. Has committed an act which, if committed by a licensee, would be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subchapter; c. Has acted in the capacity of a licensee under this subchapter without a license therefor; d. Has been convicted of a crime or offense which relates to the operation of a business dealing in the sale, rental, repair or servicing of products for the disabled. § 20-429 Power and duties of the commissioner. a. The commissioner may make and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper implementation and enforcement of this subchapter. b. In addition to any other powers of the commissioner, and not in limitation thereof, the commissioner shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, to investigate any violation thereof, and to investigate the business, business practices and business methods of any person who is or may be subject to this subchapter, if in the opinion of the commissioner such investigation is warranted. Each person shall be obliged upon the request of the commissioner to supply such information as may be required concerning the business practices or methods or the proposed business practices or methods. c. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this subchapter, and in conducting investigations relating to any violation thereof, and for the purpose of investigating the character, competence and integrity of any person who is or may be subject to this subchapter, and the business or business practices or methods thereof, the commissioner, or the commissioner's designee shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and records, in accordance with the provisions of chapter one of this title of this code. § 20-430 Duties of licensees. a. All work performed by a dealer shall be recorded legibly on an invoice which shall contain the license number and the exact name and business address of the person or business entity. The invoice shall fully, separately and clearly describe the type and make of the device, all service work performed, all parts supplied, the date or dates thereof, and all charges made and the computations thereof. A copy of the invoice shall be delivered to the customer and the other shall be retained by the dealer for a period of at least three years from the date of such delivery. b. Upon request by telephone, in person or in writing, the dealer must provide information as to price and anticipated delivery date for the rental, sale, repair or service of any product covered by this subchapter. c. The dealer must give a prospective customer a written estimate for labor and parts required for a specific job if he or she intends to take the job. No charge for work performed or parts supplied in excess of twenty percent over written estimate shall be made unless the consent of the customer was obtained as described in section 20-425 of this subchapter before such work was done, parts supplied or services rendered. d. The dealer shall return all replaced parts to the customer, except such parts as may be exempted from this requirement by regulations of the commissioner and except such parts as the service dealer requires for return to the manufacturer or distributor under a warranty arrangement. e. A dealer shall not make the remuneration, salary, wage or other compensation of any partner, staff member, or employee contingent or dependent upon, or in any manner determined by the value, price, quantity or type of parts replaced, upon any apparatus serviced or repaired by any person required to be licensed by this subchapter. f. Every dealer shall maintain any additional records required to be kept by regulations adopted by the commissioner for a period of three years. Such records must be available for inspection by the commissioner or other law enforcement officials. g. No dealer shall charge a total price, excluding tax, which is more than twenty percent above the written estimate. h. No dealer shall fail to deliver the repaired item or purchased goods, together with a final bill, as defined above, on the promised completion date, unless the consumer is notified of the delay and the anticipated completion date. If complete repair is delayed for an unreasonable period of time the consumer shall have the right to the immediate return of the property. § 20-431 Revocation or suspension of a license. After due notice and hearing subject to section 20-432 the commissioner or the commissioner's designee may revoke or suspend any license required under this subchapter or deny renewal of one upon a determination that a licensee: a. Has been convicted of a crime or offense which in the judgment of the commissioner would constitute evidence that the licensee would be unfit to properly discharge his or her responsibilities under this subchapter. b. Has practiced fraud or misrepresentation upon a customer or in establishing his or her qualifications for a license under this subchapter. c. Has made false promises of a character likely to influence, persuade or induce a customer to authorize the sale, repair, maintenance or servicing of any product covered by this subchapter. d. Has failed to perform work or service in accordance with accepted trade standards. e. Has violated any of the provisions of this subchapter or the regulations promulgated thereunder or has knowingly caused, permitted, aided or abetted another in committing such violation. § 20-432 Complaints; hearing, remedies. The commissioner shall receive and investigate complaints from the public against any person issued a license pursuant to this subchapter, and after due notice and hearing, the commissioner may suspend or revoke the license or order any other measures deemed reasonable. Subchapter 26: Games of Chance § 20-433 Short title. This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the New York city games of chance licensing law. § 20-434 Legislative intent. The council hereby declares that the raising of funds for the promotion of bona fide charitable, educational, scientific, health, religious, and patriotic causes and undertakings, where the beneficiaries are undetermined, is in the public interest. It hereby finds that, as conducted prior to the enactment of this subchapter, games of chance were the subject of exploitation by professional gamblers, promoters and commercial interests. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the council that all phases of supervision, licensing and regulation of games of chance and the conduct of games of chance should be closely controlled and that the local laws and regulations pertaining thereto should be strictly construed and rigidly enforced; that the conduct of the games and all attendant activities should be so regulated and adequate controls so instituted as to discourage commercialization in all its forms, including the rental of commercial premises for games of chance, and to ensure a maximum availability of the net proceeds of games of chance exclusively for application to the worthy causes and undertakings specified herein; that the only justification for this subchapter is to foster and support such worthy causes and undertakings, and that the mandate of section nine of article one of the state constitution, as amended, and of article nine-A of the general municipal law, should be carried out by rigid regulations to prevent commercialized gambling, prevent participation by criminal and other undesirable elements and prevent the diversion of funds from the purposes herein authorized. § 20-435 Definitions. As used in this subchapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Board shall mean New York state gaming commission. 2. Games of chance shall mean and include only the games known as merchandise wheels, coin boards, merchandise boards, seal cards, event games, raffles, and bell jars and such other specific games as may be authorized by the board, in which prizes are awarded on the basis of a designated winning number or numbers, color or colors, symbol or symbols determined by chance, but not including games commonly known as bingo or lotto which are controlled under article fourteen-H of the general municipal law and also not including slot machines, bookmaking, lottery, and policy or numbers games as defined in section 225.00 of the penal law. No game of chance shall involve wagering of money by one player against another player. 3. Authorized organization shall mean and include any bona fide religious or charitable organization or bona fide educational or service organization or bona fide organization of veterans or volunteer firefighters, which by its charter, certificate of incorporation, constitution, or act of the legislature, shall have among its dominant purposes one or more of the lawful purposes as defined in this subchapter, provided that each shall operate without profit to its members, and provided that each such organization has engaged in serving one or more of the lawful purposes as defined in this subchapter for a period of three years immediately prior to applying for a license under this subchapter. No organization shall be deemed an authorized organization which is formed primarily for the purpose of conducting games of chance and the distribution of the proceeds thereof to itself or any other organization and which does not devote at least seventy-five percent of its activities to other purposes set forth in this subdivision. No political party shall be deemed an authorized organization. 4. Lawful purposes shall mean one or more of the following causes, deeds or activities: (a) Those which shall benefit needy or deserving persons indefinite in number by enhancing their opportunity for religious or educational advancement, by relieving them from disease, suffering or distress, or by contributing to their physical well-being, by assisting them in establishing themselves in life as worthy and useful citizens, or by increasing their comprehension of a devotion to the principles upon which this nation was founded and enhancing their loyalty to their governments. (b) Those which shall initiate, perform or foster worthy public works or shall enable or further the erection or maintenance of public structures; (c) Those which shall otherwise lessen the burdens borne by government or which are voluntarily undertaken by an authorized organization to augment or supplement services which government would normally render to the people, including, in the case of volunteer firefighters or voluntary emergency medical service activities, the purchase, erection or maintenance of a building for a firehouse or a volunteer ambulance corps building, activities open to the public for the enhancement of membership and the purchase of equipment that can reasonably be expected to increase the efficiency of response to fires, accidents, medical emergencies, public calamities and other emergencies. (d) Those which shall initiate, perform or foster the provisions of services to veterans by encouraging the gathering of such veterans and shall enable or further the erection or maintenance of facilities for use by such veterans which shall be used primarily for charitable or patriotic purposes, or those purposes which shall be authorized by a bona fide organization of veterans, provided however that such proceeds are disbursed pursuant to section 189 of the general municipal law. 5. Net proceeds shall mean (a) in relation to the gross receipts from one or more occasions of games of chance, the amount that shall remain after deducting the reasonable sums necessarily and actually expended for supplies and equipment, prizes, stated rental if any, bookkeeping or accounting services according to a schedule of compensation prescribed by the board, janitorial services and utility supplies if any, license fees, and the cost of bus transportation, if authorized by the board and (b) in relation to the gross rent received by an organization licensed to conduct such games for the use of its premises by another licensee, the amount that shall remain after deducting the reasonable sums necessarily and actually expended for janitorial services and utility supplies directly attributable thereto if any. 6. Net lease shall mean a written agreement between a lessor and lessee under the terms of which the lessee is entitled to the possession, use or occupancy of the whole or part of any premises from any non-commercial or non- profit authorized games of chance lessor for which the lessee pays rent to the lessor and likewise undertakes to pay substantially all of the regularly recurring expenses incident to the operation and maintenance of such leased premises. 7. Authorized games of chance lessor shall mean an authorized organization which has been granted a lessor's license pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter. 8. Reserved. 9. Authorized supplier of games of chance equipment shall mean any person, firm, partnership or organization licensed by the board to sell or lease games of chance equipment or paraphernalia which meets the specifications and regulations established by the board. Nothing herein shall prevent an authorized organization from purchasing common articles, such as cards and dice, from normal sources of supply of such articles or from constructing equipment and paraphernalia for games of chance for its own use. However, no such equipment or paraphernalia constructed by an authorized organization shall be sold or leased to any other authorized organization without written permission from the board. 10. One occasion shall mean the conducting of any one type of game of chance during any one license period. Except for raffles conducted during professional and collegiate sporting competitions, no series of prizes on any one occasion shall aggregate more than one thousand dollars. For purposes of raffles conducted during professional and collegiate sporting competitions, one occasion shall mean the successive operations of any one such raffle for which the limit on a series of prizes provided by subdivision 6 of section 189 of the general municipal law shall apply. 11. Licensed period shall mean a period of time not to exceed 14 consecutive hours and, for purposes of the game of chance known as a raffle, license period shall mean a period of time running from January first to December thirty-first of each year. 12. Sports venue shall mean a building, structure, or place with a permanent seating capacity of more than five thousand in which professional sporting competitions are held. 13. Raffle shall mean and include those games of chance in which a participant pays money in return for a ticket or other receipt and in which a prize is awarded on the basis of a winning number or numbers, color or colors, or symbol or symbols designated on the ticket or receipt, determined by chance as a result of: (a) a drawing from among those tickets or receipts previously sold; or (b) a random event, the results of which correspond with tickets or receipts previously sold. 14. Single type of game shall mean the games of chance known as merchandise wheels, coin boards, merchandise boards, event games, raffles and bell jars and each other specific game of chance authorized by the board. 15. Operation shall mean the play of a single type of game of chance necessary to determine the outcome or winners each time wagers are made. A single drawing of a winning ticket or other receipt in a raffle shall be deemed one operation. 16. Single prize shall mean the sum of money or fair market value of merchandise or coins awarded to a participant by a games of chance licensee in any one operation of a single type of game of chance in excess of their wager. 17. Series of prizes shall mean the total amount of single prizes minus the total amount of wagers lost during the successive operations of a single type of game of chance, except that for merchandize wheels and raffles, series of prizes shall mean the sum of cash and the fair market value of merchandise awarded as single prizes during the successive operations of any single merchandise wheel or raffle. In the game of raffle, a series of prizes may include a percentage of the sum of cash received from the sale of raffle tickets. § 20-436 Conduct of games of chance. 1. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization, other than a licensee under the provisions of this subchapter, shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available for conducting games of chance a hall or other premises for any consideration whatsoever, direct or indirect, except as provided in section 20-437 of this subchapter. 2. No game of chance shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from the operation of such game. 3. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of this subchapter shall purchase, lease, or receive any supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of games of chance from other than a supplier licensed by the board or from another authorized organization. 4. The entire net proceeds of any game of chance and of any rental shall be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct the same. 5. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of one hundred dollars in any operation or conducting of a single game of chance as defined in section 20-435 of this subchapter, except for raffles conducted during professional and collegiate sporting competitions at sports venues which shall be subject to the limitations set forth in subdivision 5 of section 189 of the general municipal law. No single wager shall exceed six dollars, provided, however, that such limitation shall not apply to the amount of money or value paid by the participant in a raffle in return for a ticket or other receipt. 6. No series of prizes on any one occasion of games of chance shall aggregate more than one thousand dollars as defined in section 20-435 of this subchapter, except for raffles conducted during professional and collegiate sporting competitions at sports venues, which shall be subject to the limitations set forth in subdivision 6 of section 189 of the general municipal law. 7. No person except a bona fide member of the licensed authorized organization shall participate in the management of such games; no person except a bona fide member of the licensed authorized organization, its auxiliary or affiliated organization, shall participate in the operation of such games, as set forth in section 20-444 of this subchapter. 8. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the management or operation of any such game. 9. The unauthorized conduct of a game of chance shall constitute and be punishable as a misdemeanor. § 20-437 Application for license. 1. To conduct games of chance. (a) Each applicant for a license shall, after obtaining an identification number from the board, file with the department, a written application therefor in form to be prescribed by the board, duly executed and verified, in which shall be stated: (1) the name and address of the applicant together with sufficient facts relating to its incorporation and organization to enable such department to determine whether or not it is a bona fide authorized organization; (2) the names and addresses of its officers; the place or places where, the date or dates and the time or times when the applicant intends to conduct games under the license applied for; (3) the amount of rent to be paid or other consideration to be given directly or indirectly for each occasion for use of the premises of another authorized organization licensed under this subchapter to conduct such games or for the use of the premises of an authorized games of chance lessor; (4) all other items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in connection with the holding, operating and conducting of such games of chance and the names and addresses of the persons to whom, and the purposes for which, they are to be paid; (5) the purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such games are to be devoted and in what manner; that no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to any person for conducting such game or games or for assisting therein except as in this subchapter otherwise provided; and such other information as shall be prescribed by such rules and regulations of the board. (b) In each application there shall be designated not less than four active members of the applicant organization under whom the game or games of chance will be conducted and to the application shall be appended a statement executed by the members so designated, that they will be responsible for the conduct of such games in accordance with the terms of the license, and the rules and regulations of the board and of this subchapter. 2. Authorized games of chance lessor. Each applicant for a license to lease premises to a licensed organization for the purpose of conducting games of chance therein shall file with the department a written application therefor, in a form to be prescribed by the board, duly executed and verified, which shall set forth the name and address of the applicant; designation and address of the premises intended to be covered by the license sought; a statement that the applicant in all respects conforms with the specifications contained in the definition of authorized organization set forth in section 20-435 of this subchapter, and such other information as shall be prescribed by the board. § 20-438 Investigation; matters to be determined; issuance of license; fees; duration of license. 1. The department shall make an investigation of the qualifications of each applicant and the merits of each application, with due expedition after the filing of the application. (a) Issuance of licenses to conduct games of chance. If such department shall determine that the applicant is duly qualified to be licensed to conduct games of chance under this subchapter; that the members of the applicant designated in the application to conduct games of chance are bona fide active members of the applicant and are persons of good moral character and have never been convicted of a crime, or, if convicted, have received a pardon or a certificate of good conduct; that such games are to be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the board and that the proceeds thereof are to be disposed of as provided by this subchapter; and if such department is satisfied that no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense whatever will be paid or given to any person holding, operating or conducting or assisting in the holding, operation and conduct of any such games except as in this subchapter otherwise provided; and that except for raffles conducted during professional and collegiate sporting competitions at sports venues, which shall be subject to the limitations set forth in section 189 of the general municipal law, no prize will be given in excess of the sum or value of one hundred dollars in any single game and that the aggregate of all prizes given on one occasion, under said license shall not exceed the sum or value of one thousand dollars, the department shall issue a license to the applicant for the conduct of games of chance upon payment of a license fee of twenty-five dollars for each license period. (b) Issuance of licenses to authorized games of chance lessors. If such department shall determine that the applicant seeking to lease a hall or premises for the conduct of games of chance to an authorized organization is duly qualified to be licensed under this subchapter; that the applicant satisfies the requirements for an authorized games of chance lessor as defined in section 20-435 of this subchapter that such department shall find and determine that there is a public need and that public advantage will be served by the issuance of such license; that the applicant has filed its proposed rent for each game of chance occasion; that there is no diversion of the funds of the proposed lessee from the lawful purposes as defined in this subchapter; and that such leasing of a hall or premises for the conduct of such games is to be in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the board, it shall issue a license permitting the applicant to lease said premises for the conduct of such games to the authorized organization or organizations specified in the application during the period therein specified or such shorter period as such department shall determine, but not to exceed one year, upon payment of a license fee of fifty dollars. 2. On or before the thirtieth day of each month, the comptroller shall transmit to the state comptroller a sum equal to fifty percent of all authorized games of chance lessor license fees and the sum of fifteen dollars per license period for the conduct of games of chance collected by such department pursuant to this section during the preceding calendar month. 3. No license shall be issued under this subchapter which shall be effective for a period of more than one year. § 20-439 Hearing; amendment of license. 1. No application for the issuance of a license to an authorized organization shall be denied by the department, until after a hearing, held on due notice to the applicant, at which the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the qualifications of the applicant and the merits of the application. 2. Any license issued under this subchapter may be amended, upon application made to such department which issued it, if the subject matter of the proposed amendment could lawfully and properly have been included in the original license and upon payment of such additional license fee if any, as would have been payable if it had been so included. § 20-440 Form and contents of license; display of license. 1. Each license to conduct games of chance shall be in such form as shall be prescribed in the rules and regulations promulgated by the board, and shall contain a statement of the name and address of the licensee, of the names and addresses of the member or members of the licensee under whom the games will be conducted, of the place or places where and the date or dates and time or times when such games are to be conducted and of the purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such games are to be devoted; if any prize or prizes are to be given in cash, a statement of the amounts of the prizes authorized so to be given; and any other information which may be required by said rules and regulations to be contained therein, and each license issued for the conduct of any games shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where same is to be conducted at all times during the conduct thereof. 2. Each license to lease premises for conducting games of chance will be in such form as shall be prescribed in the rules and regulations of the board and shall contain a statement of the name and address of the licensee and the address of the leased premises, the amount of permissible rent and any information which may be required by said rules and regulations to be contained therein, and each such license shall be conspicuously displayed upon such premises at all times during the conduct of games of chance. § 20-441 Control and supervision; suspension of licenses; inspection of premises; rulemaking. 1. The department shall have and exercise rigid control and close supervision over all games of chance conducted under such license, to the end that the same are fairly conducted in accordance with the provisions of such license, the provisions of the rules and regulations promulgated by the board and the provisions of this subchapter, and the department and the board shall have the power and authority to temporarily suspend any license issued by the department pending a hearing and, after notice and hearing, the department and the board may suspend or revoke same, and additionally, impose a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars for violation of any such provisions, and the department and the board shall have the right of entry, by their respective officers and agents, at all times into any premises where any game of chance is being conducted or where it is intended that any such game shall be conducted, or where any equipment being used or intended to be used in the conduct thereof is found, for the purpose of inspecting the same. An agent of the department shall make an on-site inspection during the conduct of all games of chance licensed pursuant to this subchapter. 2. The commissioner of the department may promulgate such rules and regulations as deemed necessary for the proper implementation and enforcement of this subchapter and which are not inconsistent with those rules and regulations promulgated by the board. § 20-442 Participation by persons under eighteen. No person under the age of eighteen years shall be permitted to play any game or games of chance conducted pursuant to any license issued under this subchapter. No person under the age of eighteen years shall be permitted to conduct or assist in the conduct of any game of chance conducted pursuant to any license issued under this subchapter. § 20-443 Frequency and scheduling of games. No game or games of chance shall be conducted under any license issued under this subchapter more often than twelve times in any calendar year. Games shall be conducted only between the hours of noon and midnight on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Sunday; and between the hours of noon on Friday and two a.m. Saturday; and between the hours of noon on Saturday and two a.m. Sunday. The two a.m. closing period shall also apply to a legal holiday. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section no games of chance shall be conducted on Easter Sunday, Christmas Day, New Year's Eve, and the days of Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur. The restrictions in this section shall not apply when only the game of chance known as raffle is conducted, provided that authorized organizations licensed under this subchapter may conduct raffles during professional and collegiate sporting competitions at sports venues only from two hours before the beginning of play until the end of play. § 20-444 Persons operating and conducting games; equipment; expenses; compensation. 1. No person shall operate any games of chance under any license issued under this subchapter except a bona fide member of the authorized organization to which the license is issued, or a bona fide member of an organization or association which is an auxiliary to the licensee or a bona fide member of an organization or association of which such licensee is an auxiliary or a bona fide member of an organization or association which is affiliated with the licensee by being, with it, auxiliary to another organization or association. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the number of games of chance licensees for whom such persons may operate games of chance nor to prevent non- members from assisting the licensee in any activity other than managing or operating games. 2. No game of chance shall be conducted with any equipment except such as shall be owned or leased by the authorized organization so licensed or used without payment of any compensation therefore by the licensee. An authorized organization affiliated with a sports venue may utilize equipment supplied by a third-party provided that any equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of games of chance come from a supplier licensed by the board or another authorized organization. 3. Except for raffles conducted during professional and collegiate sporting competitions at sports venues, at least two officers, directors, trustees or clergy of the authorized organization shall upon request certify, under oath, that the persons assisting in holding, operating or conducting any game of chance are bona fide members of such authorized organization, auxiliary or affiliated organization. Upon request by the department, any such person involved in such games of chance shall certify that he or she has no criminal record. 4. No items of expense shall be incurred or paid in connection with the conducting of any game of chance pursuant to any license issued under this subchapter except those that are reasonable and are necessarily expended for games of chance supplies and equipment, prizes, security personnel, stated rental if any, bookkeeping or accounting services according to a schedule of compensation prescribed by the board, janitorial services and utility supplies if any, license fees, and the cost of bus transportation, if authorized by such department. § 20-445 Charge for admission and participation; amount of prizes; award of prizes. Except for raffles conducted during professional and collegiate sporting competitions at sports venues, no more than two dollars shall be charged by any licensee for admission to any room or place in which any game or games of chance are to be conducted under any license issued under this subchapter. The department may in its discretion fix a minimum fee. Except for raffles conducted during professional and collegiate sporting competitions at sports venues, every winner shall be determined and every prize shall be awarded and delivered within the same calendar day as that upon which the game was played. The winner of any single prize in a raffle conducted during professional and collegiate sporting competitions at sports venues shall not be required to be present at the time such raffle is conducted. No alcoholic beverage shall be offered or given as a prize in any game of chance. § 20-446 Advertising games. Except for raffles conducted during professional and collegiate sporting competitions at sports venues, no game of chance conducted or to be conducted in this city shall be advertised as to its location, the time when it is to be or has been played, or the prizes awarded or to be awarded, or transportation facilities to be provided to such game, by means of newspapers, radio, television or sound trucks or by means of billboards, posters or handbills or any other means addressed to the general public, except that one sign not exceeding sixty square feet in area may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises owned or occupied by a licensed authorized organization, and when an organization is licensed to conduct games of chance on premises of an authorized games of chance lessor, one additional such sign may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises in which the games are to be conducted. Additional signs may be displayed upon any fire fighting equipment belonging to any licensee, which is a volunteer fire company, or upon any first-aid or rescue squad equipment belonging to any licensee, which is a first-aid or rescue squad, in and throughout the community or communities served by such volunteer fire company or such first-aid or rescue squad, as the case may be. When an organization is licensed or authorized to conduct games of chance on the premises of an authorized games of chance lessor, one additional sign may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises in which the games are to be conducted. A licensee conducting raffles during professional and collegiate sporting competitions at sports venues may advertise conduct of games of chance to the general public by means of newspaper, circular, handbill, poster, and through the internet or television as may be regulated by the rules and regulations of the board. All advertisements shall be limited to the description of such event as Games of chance or Las Vegas Night, the name of the authorized organization conducting such games, the license number of the authorized organization as assigned by the department, the prizes offered and the date, location and time of the event. § 20-447 Statement of receipts, expenses; additional license fees. 1. Within seven days after the conclusion of any license period, the authorized organization which conducted the same, and its members who were in charge thereof, and when applicable the authorized organization which rented its premises therefor, shall each furnish to the department a statement subscribed by the member in charge and affirmed by him or her as true, under the penalties of perjury, showing the amount of the gross receipts derived therefrom and each item of expense incurred, or paid, and each item of expenditure made or to be made other than prizes, the name and address of each person to whom each such item of expense has been paid, or is to be paid, with a detailed description of the merchandise purchased or the services rendered therefor, the net proceeds derived from the conduct of the games of chance during such license period, and the use to which such proceeds have been or are to be applied and a list of prizes offered and given, with the respective values thereof, and it shall be the duty of each licensee to maintain and keep such books and records as may be necessary to substantiate the particulars of each such statement. 2. Upon the filing of such statement of receipts, the authorized organization furnishing the same shall pay to the department as and for an additional license fee a sum based upon the reported net proceeds, if any, for the license period covered by such statement and determined in accordance with such schedule as shall be established from time to time by the board to defray the actual cost to the city of administering the provisions of this subchapter, but such additional license fee shall not exceed five percent of the net proceeds for such occasion. § 20-448 Examination of books and records; examination of officers and employees; disclosure of information. 1. The department and the board shall have power to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of: a. Any authorized organization which is or has been licensed to conduct games of chance, so far as they may relate to games of chance including the maintenance, control and disposition of net proceeds derived from games of chance or from the use of its premises for games of chance, and to examine any manager, officer, director, agent, member or employee thereof under oath in relation to the conduct of any such game under any such license, the use of its premises for games of chance, or the disposition of net proceeds derived from games of chance, as the case may be. b. Any authorized games of chance lessor so far as they may relate to leasing premises for games of chance and to examine said lessor or any manager, officer, director, agent or employee thereof under oath in relation to such leasing. 2. Any information received pursuant to subdivision one shall not be disclosed except so far as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this subchapter. § 20-449 Appeals from the decision of the department to the board. Any applicant for, or holder of, any license issued or to be issued under this subchapter aggrieved by any action of the department may appeal to the board from the determination of said department by filing with such department a written notice of appeal within thirty days after the determination or action appealed from, and upon the hearing of such appeal, the evidence, if any, taken before such department and any additional evidence, may be produced and shall be considered in arriving at a determination of the matters in issue, and the action of the board upon said appeal shall be binding upon such department and all parties to said appeal. § 20-450 Offenses; forfeiture of license; ineligibility to apply for license. Any person, association, corporation or organization who or which shall: (1) make any material false statement in any application for any license authorized to be issued under this subchapter; (2) pay or receive, for the use of any premises for conducting games of chance, a rental in excess of the amount specified as the permissible rent in the license provided for in subdivision two of section 20-440 of this subchapter; (3) fail to keep such books and records as shall fully and truly record all transactions connected with the conducting of games of chance or the leasing of premises to be used for the conduct of games of chance; (4) falsify or make any false entry in any books or records so far as they relate in any manner to the conduct of games of chance, to the disposition of the proceeds thereof and to the application of the rents received by any authorized organization; (5) divert or pay any portion of the net proceeds of any game of chance to any person, association or corporation, except in furtherance of one or more of the lawful purposes defined in this subchapter; shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall forfeit any license issued under this subchapter and be ineligible to apply for a license under this subchapter for at least one year thereafter. § 20-451 Unlawful games of chance. Any person, association, corporation or organization holding, operating, or conducting a game or games of chance is guilty of a misdemeanor, except when operating, holding or conducting: (a) in accordance with a valid license issued pursuant to this subchapter, or (b) on behalf of a bona fide organization of persons sixty years of age or over, commonly referred to as senior citizens, solely for the purpose of amusement and recreation of its members where (i) the organization has applied for and received an identification number from the board, (ii) no player or other person furnishes anything of value for the opportunity to participate, (iii) the prizes awarded or to be awarded are nominal, (iv) no person other than a bona fide active member of the organization participates in the conduct of the games, and (v) no person is paid for conducting or assisting in the conduct of the game or games. Subchapter 27: General Vendors § 20-452 Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meaning: a. Food. Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substances, beverages, ingredients, ice or water used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption. b. General vendor. A person who hawks, peddles, sells, leases or offers to sell or lease, at retail, goods or services, including newspapers, periodicals, books, pamphlets or other similar written matter in a public space. This definition shall not include a food vendor as defined in subdivision c of section 17-306 of chapter three of title seventeen of this code, or a person required to be licensed under section 20-229 of subchapter seven of chapter two of this title of this code. This definition also shall not include persons who use stands or booths in a public space for the shining of shoes. This definition shall not include a pedicab driver licensed in accordance with subchapter nine of this chapter, who is operating a pedicab registered pursuant to subchapter nine and shall not include a pedicab owner licensed pursuant to such subchapter. c. General vending business or vending business. The business of selling, leasing or offering to sell or lease, at retail, goods or services other than food, engaged in by a general vendor in a public space. d. Public space. All publicly owned property between the property lines on a street as such property lines are shown on the City Record including but not limited to a park, plaza, roadway, shoulder, tree space, sidewalk or parking space between such property lines. It shall also include, but not be limited to, publicly owned or leased land, buildings, piers, wharfs, stadiums and terminals. e. Pushcart. Any wheeled vehicle or device used by a general vendor in a public space, other than a motor vehicle or trailer, which may be moved with or without the assistance of a motor and which does not require registration by the department of motor vehicles. f. Stand. A movable, portable or collapsible structure, framework, device, container or other contrivance, other than a vehicle or pushcart, used by a general vendor in a public space for the purpose of displaying, keeping or storing any merchandise or article required by him or her while acting as such vendor. g. Vehicle. A motor vehicle or trailer, as defined in the vehicle and traffic law. h. Vend. To hawk, peddle, sell, lease, offer to sell or lease, at retail, goods or services other than food in a public space. It shall be unlawful for any individual to act as a general vendor without having first obtained a license in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, except that it shall be lawful for a general vendor who hawks, peddles, sells or offers to sell, at retail, only newspapers, periodicals, books, pamphlets or other similar written matter, but no other items required to be licensed by any other provision of this code, to vend such without obtaining a license therefor. § 20-454 License term; fees. a. All licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for two years unless sooner suspended or revoked. The commissioner shall establish by regulation the expiration date of such licenses. b. The commissioner may issue a temporary license upon the furnishing of information and an application in such form and detail as he or she may prescribe and upon the payment of a fee of ten dollars for such temporary license. c. The annual license fee for a license or a renewal thereof shall be two hundred dollars. d. The fee for issuing a duplicate license when the original has been lost, destroyed or mutilated shall be ten dollars. § 20-455 Applications. a. Each person applying for a general vendor's license or renewal thereof shall file an application in such form and detail as the commissioner may prescribe and, unless exempted by article four of the general business law, shall pay the fee required by this subchapter. b. In addition to any other information required, the commissioner shall require the following information: 1. The name and home address of the applicant and the name and address of the owner, if other than the applicant, of any vehicle, pushcart, stand or goods to be used in the vending business. 2. A description of the type of goods or services to be vended or displayed and a description of any vehicle, pushcart or stand to be used in the vending business. 3. Three prints of a full-face photograph of the applicant taken not more than thirty days prior to the date of the application. 4. Proof that the applicant has complied with all applicable laws, including compliance with section eleven hundred thirty-four of the tax law by obtaining from the New York state department of taxation and finance a certificate of authority designating the applicant's sales tax identification number. 5. An applicant who is a non-resident of the city shall provide the name and address of a registered agent within the city or designate the commissioner as his or her agent upon whom process or other notification may be served. 6. No City officer or employee shall inquire about an applicant's immigration or citizenship status as part of an application made pursuant to this section. Information about an applicant's immigration or citizenship status shall not affect the consideration of the application for a general vendor's license or renewal thereof. § 20-455.1 Domestic partners. For purposes of this subchapter, the rights and benefits bestowed upon the surviving spouse of an honorably discharged member of the armed forces of the United States pursuant to article four of the general business law shall also be bestowed upon the surviving domestic partner of any such veteran. § 20-456 License approval or denial. a. Upon the approval of an application the commissioner shall issue a license to the applicant. b. The commissioner may refuse to issue or renew a license if the applicant has been found to have violated chapter one or subchapter one of chapter five of this title or the rules or regulations thereto, provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between the provisions of such chapter and subchapter and the provisions of this subchapter, the provisions of this subchapter shall prevail; has pending any unanswered summonses or unsatisfied fines or penalties for violation of this subchapter or the regulations promulgated thereto; or for any cause set forth in any other section of this chapter as a ground for suspension or revocation. § 20-457 License renewal. Repealed. § 20-458 Exemptions. a. The commissioner may promulgate regulations exempting any non-profit association including, but not limited to, a government agency, charitable, educational, religious or other such organization from compliance with any of the provisions of this subchapter. b. On the day of Asian Lunar New Year, as defined in section 19-163 of the administrative code, and during the seven days prior to such day, any person may sell plants and flowers for the purpose of celebrating Asian Lunar New Year without first securing a license pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter. Notwithstanding the above, any individual selling plants and flowers pursuant to this subdivision must comply with all other applicable provisions of this subchapter. § 20-459 New licenses; existing licenses. a. The number of licenses in effect pursuant to this subchapter on the first day of September, nineteen hundred seventy-nine shall be the maximum number of licenses permitted to be in effect. b. A license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be renewable by the licensee upon its expiration or within sixty days of its expiration provided the licensee meets all other requirements for renewal, provided that the license has not been revoked, and provided that the licensee has not committed violations which could be a basis for license revocation under any provision of this subchapter. § 20-460 Hearings. Unless otherwise specifically provided, notice and hearings upon denial of an application, the suspension or revocation of a license or the imposition of penalties provided in subdivision b of section 20-472 shall be in accordance with the provisions of chapter one of this title and the rules and regulations applicable thereto. § 20-461 Display of license. a. Each general vendor shall carry his or her license on his or her person and it shall be exhibited upon demand to any police officer, authorized officer or employee of the department or other city agency. b. The general vendor's license shall contain his or her name, his or her license number and a non-removable photograph of the licensee. It shall be worn conspicuously by him or her at all times while he or she is operating as a general vendor. § 20-462 Notification of change. Whenever any information provided on the application for a license or renewal thereof has changed the licensee shall notify the commissioner within ten days of such change. § 20-463 Bookkeeping requirements. Repealed. § 20-464 Duties of licensees. Each licensed general vendor shall: a. Permit regular inspections by the department or any authorized city agency of any goods, vehicle, pushcart or stand used in the operation of the vending business, and of any premises used by him or her for the storage or preparation of goods intended to be vended in such business; b. Provide to the commissioner, or other authorized officer or employee of a city agency requesting such information, on a semi-annual basis, or more often if required by regulation promulgated by the Commissioner, the address and name of the owners or the manufacturers, suppliers or distributors from whom the licensee receives his or her goods and also the address at which the licensee stores his or her goods or any vehicle, pushcart or stand used in the operation of the vending business; c. Not use or permit anyone else to use a vending vehicle, pushcart or stand for the sale or lease of any goods or merchandise prohibited by the commissioner; d. Not sell, lend, lease or in any manner transfer his or her license or any interest therein unless prior approval of the commissioner has been obtained. § 20-465 Restrictions on the placement of vehicles, pushcarts and stands; vending in certain areas prohibited. a. No general vendor shall engage in any vending business on any sidewalk unless such sidewalk has at least a twelve-foot wide clear pedestrian path to be measured from the boundary of any private property to any obstructions in or on the sidewalk, or if there are no obstructions, to the curb. In no event shall any pushcart or stand be placed on any part of a sidewalk other than that which abuts the curb. b. No general vendor shall occupy more than eight linear feet of public space parallel to the curb in the operation of a vending business and, in addition, no general vendor operating any vending business on any sidewalk shall occupy more than three linear feet to be measured from the curb toward the property line. c. No vending vehicle, pushcart, stand, goods or any other item related to the operation of a vending business shall touch, lean against or be affixed permanently or temporarily to any building or structure including, but not limited to lamp posts, parking meters, mail boxes, traffic signal stanchions, fire hydrants, tree boxes, benches, bus shelters, refuse baskets or traffic barriers. d. No vending pushcart, stand or goods shall be located against display windows of fixed location businesses, nor shall they be within twenty feet from any entranceway to any building, store, theatre, movie house, sports arena or other place of public assembly, or within twenty feet from exits, including service exits, to buildings that are exclusively residential at the street level. e. No general vendor shall vend within any bus stop or taxi stand, within the portion of the sidewalk abutting any no standing zone adjacent to a hospital as defined in subdivision one of section 2801 of the New York state public health law, or within ten feet of any driveway, any subway entrance or exit, or any corner. For the purposes of this subdivision, ten feet from any corner shall be measured from a point where the property line on the nearest intersecting block face, when extended, meets the curb. f. Each general vendor who vends from a pushcart or stand in the roadway shall obey all traffic and parking laws, rules and regulations as now exist or as may be promulgated, but in no case shall a general vendor vend so as to restrict the continued maintenance of a clear passageway for vehicles. g. (1) No general vendor shall vend on any street which is in a C4, C5, or C6 zoning district, or in the area bounded on the east by Second Avenue, on the south by Thirtieth Street, on the west by Ninth Avenue and Columbus Avenue and on the north by Sixty-fifth Street, except that as chairperson of the street vendor review panel established pursuant to section 20-465.1 of this subchapter, the commissioner of the department of small business services or his or her designee may receive applications from any person, group, organization or other entity to permit general vendors on any street within said area or said zones, or to prohibit general vendors on any other street. Such applications shall be considered by the street vendor review panel in accordance with the procedures enumerated in section 20-465.1 of this subchapter. (2) No general vendor shall vend on any street which is in the area including and bounded on the east by the easterly side of Broadway, on the south by the southerly side of Liberty Street, on the west by the westerly side of West Street and on the north by the southerly side of Barclay Street. In addition: (a) No general vendor shall vend on the easterly or westerly side of Greenwich Street between Liberty Street and Thames Street; (b) No general vendor shall vend on the easterly side of West Broadway between Barclay Street and Park Place; (c) No general vendor shall vend on the northerly or southerly side of Liberty Street between Trinity Place to West Street; (d) No general vendor shall vend on the easterly side of West Street between Liberty Street and Cedar Street; (e) No general vendor shall vend on the westerly side of Trinity Place between Liberty Street and Thames Street; and (f) Notwithstanding the restrictions in paragraph 2 of subdivision g of this section, general vending shall be permitted on the following streets provided that general vendors comply with all applicable laws and rules: (1) The easterly and westerly side of Broadway between Barclay Street and Vesey Street. (2) The easterly side of West Street between Barclay Street and Vesey Street; and (3) The southerly side of Barclay Street between Church Street and Broadway. (3) Upon issuance of a new general vendor license or a renewal of an existing license, the commissioner shall provide a copy of subchapter twenty- seven of chapter two of this title and of the rules of the city of New York implementing such subchapter to such new or renewal licensee. (4) No general vendor shall vend on any street that is in the area including and bounded on the east by the easterly side of Union Street, on the south by the southerly side of Sanford Avenue, on the west by the westerly side of College Point Boulevard and on the north by the northerly side of Northern Boulevard. (5) No general vendor shall vend beginning on Thanksgiving until New Year's Day of the following year in the area including and bounded on the west by the westerly side of 10th avenue, on the south by the southerly side of 86th street, on the east by the easterly side of 13th avenue and on the north by the northerly side of 81st street, between the hours of midnight to 6:00 a.m. and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. to midnight, in the borough of Brooklyn. h. No vending vehicle, pushcart, stand, goods or any other item related to the operation of a vending business shall be placed within a bicycle lane. For purposes of this section, the term “bicycle lane” means a portion of the roadway that has been marked off or separated for the preferential or exclusive use of bicycles. i. No general vendor shall vend on the median strip of a divided roadway unless such strip is intended for use as a pedestrian mall or plaza. j. No general vendor shall vend within the geographical areas under the jurisdiction of the department of parks and recreation unless written authorization therefor has been obtained from the commissioner of such department, but nothing therein contained shall exempt any general vendor from obtaining a license in accordance with this subchapter. k. Where exigent circumstances exist and a police officer or other authorized officer or employee of any city agency gives notice to a general vendor to temporarily move from any location such general vendor shall not vend from such location. For the purposes of this subdivision, exigent circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, unusually heavy pedestrian or vehicular traffic, existence of any obstructions in the public space, an accident, fire or other emergency situation, a parade, demonstration or other such event or occurrence at or near such location. l. [Reserved.] m. No general vendor shall vend over any ventilation grill, cellar door, manhole, transformer vault, or subway access grating. n. No general vendor shall vend using the surface of the sidewalk, or a blanket or board placed immediately on the sidewalk or on top of a trash receptacle or cardboard boxes to display merchandise. No general vendor display may exceed five feet in height from ground level, provided that a general vendor may use an umbrella that exceeds such height. o. No general vendor shall sell or offer for sale any item directly from any parked or double parked motor vehicle. p. No general vendor shall use electricity, electrical generating equipment or oil or gasoline powered equipment, devices or machinery of any kind. q. No general vendor shall vend: 1. within twenty feet from sidewalk cafes or licensed stoop line stands; and 2. within five feet from (a) bus shelters, (b) newsstands, (c) public telephones or (d) disabled access ramps. r. The department, or such other agency designated by the mayor, shall provide a website that shows a map of block faces where general vending is prohibited by law, based on the day and hour entered by the user. 1 Street vendor review panel. a. There is hereby established a street vendor review panel consisting of four members. Such panel shall include the commissioner of the department of small business services, the director of the department of city planning and the commissioner of the department of transportation, or their respective designees. Such panel shall also include a member appointed by the mayor upon nomination by the speaker of the council. The commissioner of the department of small business services or his or her designee shall serve as chairperson. The departments of small business services, city planning and transportation shall provide such assistance as the street vendor review panel deems necessary and appropriate to enable such panel to carry out its responsibilities. In the same manner as provided in section 1043 of the city charter, the street vendor review panel shall promulgate, and may from time to time amend, rules prohibiting the operation of any general vending business or food vending business, as defined in chapter three of title seventeen of this code, or both, on any street, at any time, after making a determination that such vending business would constitute a serious and immediate threat to the health, safety and well-being of the public on the ground that such street at such time is regularly too congested by pedestrian or vehicular traffic to permit the operation of such business. No general vendor or food vendor, as defined in chapter three of title seventeen of the code, shall vend on any such streets at any such times. b. Requests for the adoption or amendment of rules prohibiting the operation of any general vending business or food vending business, as defined in chapter three of title seventeen of this code, or both, on any street, at any time, may be submitted to the commissioner of the department of small business services or his or her designee. Within sixty days after the submission of such request, the street vendor review panel shall convene to determine either to deny such request in writing, stating the reasons for denial, or to state its intention to initiate rulemaking, by a specified date, concerning the subject of such request. In initiating a rulemaking, the panel shall not be bound by the streets or times requested, and may modify such streets and such times at its discretion. If the panel has stated the intention to initiate rulemaking, it shall publish such proposed rule for comment and public hearing in the same manner as provided in subdivisions b and d of section 1043 of the city charter. After consideration of the relevant comments presented, the panel may adopt a final rule relating to such streets and such times pursuant to subdivisions d and e of section 1043 of the city charter. c. Copies of any rules promulgated pursuant to this section shall be mailed to each licensed general vendor or licensed food vendor, by the department or the department of health and mental hygiene, respectively, by regular mail at the last home address provided by the vendor to the department or the department of health and mental hygiene and shall be annexed to each license or renewal issued to any general vendor or food vendor. d. Nothing herein contained shall exempt any general vendor from the provisions of subdivision g of section 20-465 of this subchapter. § 20-465.2 Street vendor advisory board. a. There is hereby established a street vendor advisory board consisting of the commissioner of consumer and worker protection, the commissioner of health and mental hygiene, the commissioner of small business services, the commissioner of transportation, and the police commissioner, or the designee of any such commissioner, six members appointed by the speaker, two of whom represent street vendors, one of whom represent the small business community, one of whom represents organizations representing workers at retail food stores, one of whom represents property owners and one of whom who represents a community organization, and four members appointed by the mayor, two of whom represent street vendors and two of whom represent the small business community. b. In addition to its other duties, the street vendor advisory board shall, prior to June 1 of each year from 2023 through 2030, issue to the speaker of the council a recommendation on whether the department of health and mental hygiene's authority to issue any or all of the supervisory licenses authorized to be issued by such department should be restricted, expanded, or otherwise altered based on an analysis of the results of the increased number of food vendor permits issued pursuant to the local law that added this section. § 20-466 Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or otherwise transfer any goods or merchandise to an unlicensed general vendor for resale in a public space or to rent or otherwise knowingly transfer any vehicle, stand or pushcart for use by an unlicensed general vendor in a vending business in a public space. § 20-467 Suspension and revocation of license. Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter may be suspended or revoked by the commissioner upon notice and hearing for any of the following causes: a. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements contained in the application for the license; b. Violation of chapter one or subchapter one of chapter five of this title of this code or the regulations promulgated thereto; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between the provisions of such chapter and subchapter and the provisions of this subchapter, the provisions of this subchapter shall prevail; c. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made in connection with the selling or leasing of any goods or services; d. Four or more violations of any provision of this subchapter or the regulations promulgated thereto in a two-year period; e. Failure to answer a summons or notice of violation, appear for a hearing, or pay a fine or civil penalty imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter or the regulations promulgated hereunder; f. Conviction of possessing or selling stolen property pursuant to section 165.40, 165.45 or 165.50 of the penal law. § 20-468 Enforcement. a. Authorized officers and employees of the department and members of the police department shall have the power to enforce all laws, rules and regulations relating to general vendors. This provision shall in no way restrict any other power granted by law to an officer or employee of any city agency. b. If a general vendor does not move his or her goods, vehicle, pushcart or stand when directed to do so by a police officer or other authorized officer or employee of the city in compliance with the provisions of subdivision k of section 20-465 such officer or employee is authorized to provide for the removal of such goods, vehicle, pushcart or stand to any garage, automobile pound or other place of safety, and the owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of such vehicle, pushcart, stand or goods may be charged with reasonable costs for removal and storage payable prior to the release of such goods, vehicle, pushcart or stand. c. Any police officer may seize any vehicle, pushcart or stand or other such device used by an unlicensed general vendor in violation of section 20-453 including a vehicle, pushcart or other such device used to transport goods sold, given or otherwise transferred to an unlicensed general vendor in violation of section 20-466 of this subchapter and may seize any goods which are being sold by an unlicensed general vendor in violation of section 20-453 and such vehicle, pushcart, stand or goods or other device shall be subject to forfeiture upon notice and judicial determination. If a forfeiture proceeding is not commenced, the owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of such goods, vehicle, pushcart, or stand or other device may be charged with the reasonable cost for removal and storage payable prior to the release of such goods, vehicle, pushcart, or stand or other device, unless the charge of unlicensed vending has been dismissed. d. If a general vendor operates any general vending business in violation of the provisions of section 20-465.1 of this subchapter and any rules promulgated pursuant thereto on any such street and at any such time as the street vendor review panel has determined to be regularly too congested by pedestrian or vehicular traffic to permit the operation of any general vending business thereat without there being a serious and immediate threat to the health, safety and well-being of the public, or if a general vendor operates any such business in the area designated in paragraph two of subdivision g of section 20-465 of this subchapter, any authorized officer or employee of the department or member of the police department is authorized to provide for the removal of such general vendor's goods, vehicle, pushcart or stand to any garage, automobile pound or other place of safety, and such goods, vehicle, pushcart or stand may be subject to forfeiture upon notice and judicial determination. If a forfeiture hearing is not commenced, the owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of such vehicle, pushcart, stand or goods may be charged with reasonable costs for removal and storage payable prior to the release of such goods, vehicle, pushcart or stand. e. Any police officer may seize any vehicle, pushcart, stand or goods of a vendor operating any general vending business in violation of the following subdivisions of section 20-465: subdivisions b, e, i, or the provisions of subdivision m relating to obstruction of ventilation grilles. The owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of such vehicle, pushcart, stand, or goods may be charged with reasonable costs for removal and storage payable prior to the release of such vehicle, pushcart, stand or goods, unless the violation has been dismissed. f. If a general vendor who exclusively vends written matter conducts such business with the use of a vehicle, pushcart or stand, or using the surface of the sidewalk, or a blanket or board placed immediately on the sidewalk or on top of a trash receptacle or cardboard boxes to display merchandise, on any street and at any time where both (i) general vending is prohibited pursuant to section 20-465.1 of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder or paragraph two of subdivision g of section 20-465 of this subchapter; and (ii) food vending is prohibited pursuant to section 20-465.1 of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder or pursuant to subdivision k or 1 of section 17-315 of this code, any authorized officer or employee of the department or member of the police department is authorized to provide for the removal of such general vendor's goods, vehicle, pushcart or stand to any garage, automobile pound or other place of safety. § 20-469 Forfeiture. a. Notice of the institution of the forfeiture proceeding shall be in accordance with the provisions of the civil practice law and rules. b. The police department having custody of the seized property, after judicial determination of forfeiture shall, upon a public notice of at least five days, sell such forfeited property at public sale. The net proceeds of such sale shall be paid into the general fund of the city. In the alternative, any such property may be used or converted to use for the purpose of any city, state or federal agency, or for charitable purposes, upon consultation with the human resources administration and other appropriate city agencies, and the police commissioner shall report annually to the city council on the distribution of such property. § 20-470 Seizure of perishable goods. In the event that any seizure made pursuant to this subchapter shall include any perishable items or food products which cannot be retained in custody without such items or food products becoming unwholesome, putrid, decomposed or unfit in any way, they may be delivered to the commissioner of health for disposition pursuant to the provisions of section 17-323 of this code. § 20-471 Regulations. The commissioner shall make such regulations as deemed necessary for the proper implementation and enforcement of this subchapter. § 20-472 Penalties. a. Any person who violates the provisions of sections 20-453 and 20-474.1 of this subchapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than three months or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, any police officer may seize any vehicle used to transport goods to a general vendor, along with the goods contained therein, where the driver is required to but cannot produce evidence of a distributor's license. Any vehicle and goods so seized may be subject to forfeiture upon notice and judicial determination. If a forfeiture proceeding is not commenced, the owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession of such vehicle and goods may be charged with the reasonable cost for removal and storage payable prior to the release of such vehicle and goods, unless the charge of unlicensed distributing has been dismissed. b. Except as provided in subdivision a of this section, a person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any of the rules or regulations promulgated hereunder shall be guilty of an offense punishable by the court as follows: 1. For the first violation, a fine of not less than twenty-five nor more than fifty dollars. 2. For the second violation issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of a first violation, a fine of not less than fifty dollars nor more than one hundred dollars. 3. For a third violation issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of a first violation, a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than two hundred and fifty dollars. 4. For any subsequent violations issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of a first violation, a penalty of not more than five hundred dollars. c. 1. In addition to the penalties prescribed by subdivision a of this section, any person who violates, or any person aiding another to violate, the provisions of section 20-453 of this subchapter shall be liable for a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars together with a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars per day for every day during which the unlicensed business operated; except that a person who violates, or any person aiding another to violate, the provisions of section 20-453 of this subchapter by engaging in continued unlicensed activity as defined by the commissioner, considering factors including but not limited to the frequency and duration of such unlicensed activity, shall be liable for a civil penalty of one thousand dollars together with a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars per day for every day during which the unlicensed business operated. 2. In addition to the penalties prescribed by subdivision b of this section, any person who violates any of the provisions of this subchapter, other than section 20-453, or any of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty as follows: (a) For the first violation, a penalty of twenty-five dollars. (b) For the second violation issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of a first violation, a penalty of fifty dollars. (c) For the third violation issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of a first violation, a penalty of one hundred dollars. (d) For any subsequent violations issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of a first violation, a penalty of two hundred and fifty dollars. 3. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this subdivision, a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of subdivision b of section 20-461 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The notice of violation for such first violation shall inform the respondent of the provision of law or rule that the department believes the respondent has violated, describe the condition or activity that is the basis for the notice of violation, and advise the respondent that the law authorizes civil penalties for such violation and that subsequent violations may result in the imposition of such civil penalties. Any person who violates subdivision b of section 20-461 or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of twenty-five dollars for a second violation and a civil penalty of fifty dollars for a third or subsequent violation. d. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to the provisions of subdivision c of this section shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation which shall be returnable to the environmental control board. The board shall have the power to impose the penalties prescribed by subdivision c of this section. e. Any person who violates the provisions of sections 20-465 and 20-465.1 of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than thirty days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 1 Reports on vendor license renewals, suspensions, revocations, and adjudications. a. Commencing on June 1, 2013, and every twelve months thereafter, the department shall issue an annual report to the council with respect to general vendor license renewals, suspensions, and revocations. Each report shall include the following information for the twelve-month period prior to the issuance of the report: (i) the number of general vendor license renewals denied and the basis for each such denial, including but not limited to outstanding or multiple violations of the provisions of this subchapter; (ii) the number of general vendor licenses suspended pursuant to section 20-467 of this subchapter and the basis for each such suspension; and (iii) the number of general vendor licenses revoked pursuant to section 20-467 of this subchapter and the basis for each such revocation. b. Commencing on June 1, 2013, and every three months thereafter, the environmental control board shall issue quarterly reports to the council with respect to violations that were issued pursuant to this subchapter or to subchapter two of chapter three of title seventeen of the administrative code, and that were adjudicated by the environmental control board. Each report shall detail the three-month period prior to the issuance of the report. Such report shall include: 1. the number of hearings held to adjudicate violations of each section of such subchapters; 2. for each section of such subchapters the number of violations: (a) adjudicated during the period; (b) for which vendors were found liable; and (c) for which vendors were found not liable; 3. the dollar amount of each civil penalty imposed by the board; and 4. the dollar amount collected on each civil penalty imposed by the board. § 20-473 Exemptions for general vendors who exclusively vend written matter. General vendors who exclusively vend written matter are exempt from the following provisions of this subchapter: sections 20-454, 20-455, 20-456, 20-457, 20-459, 20-461, 20-462, and 20-464; paragraph 1 of subdivision g of section 20-465; subdivision j of section 20-465, except that nothing herein shall be construed to deprive the commissioner of the department of parks and recreation of the authority to regulate the vending of written matter in a manner consistent with the purpose of the parks and the declared legislative intent of this subchapter; section 20-465.1 and any rules promulgated thereunder, except that on any street where both general vending is prohibited pursuant to section 20-465.1 and any rules promulgated thereunder and food vending is prohibited pursuant to section 20-465.1 and any rules promulgated thereunder or pursuant to subdivision 1 of section 17-315, general vendors who exclusively vend written matter shall not be permitted to vend with the use of any vehicle, pushcart or stand; sections 20-466 and 20-467; subdivisions c and d of section 20-468; sections 20-469 and 20-470; and subdivision a, and paragraph 1 of subdivision c of section 20-472. A general vendor who exclusively vends written matter and who has had any written matter, or any vehicle, pushcart or stand removed under the provisions of subdivisions b, e or f of section 20-468 of this subchapter may serve upon the officer in charge of the police department facility in which the property is located notice of a request for the return of such property either before or after a judicial or administrative determination, conducted in accordance with chapter one of this title and all other laws, rules and regulations applicable thereto, of the violation underlying the removal of such written matter, vehicle, pushcart or stand has been made irrespective of the result of such determination. Unless the judicial or administrative proceeding has terminated in favor of such vendor, the owner, or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of such vehicle, pushcart, stand or written matter which has been removed under the aforementioned provisions shall be charged with reasonable costs for removal and storage, payable upon or after the judicial or administrative determination that the violation underlying the removal of such written matter, vehicle, pushcart or stand occurred. Such charge for removal and storage, which shall be established by the police commissioner by regulation shall be made part of the fine, penalty or judgment rendered in the judicial or administrative proceeding and shall be paid to the police department property clerk by the judicial or administrative body receiving such fine, penalty or judgment. § 20-474.1 Delivery to general vendors; distributor's license required. a. It shall be unlawful for any individual to transport goods by means of a motor vehicle, as defined in the vehicle and traffic law, to a public space for sale or other transfer to a general vendor, without having first obtained a distributor's license in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. For the purpose of this section, distributor shall be defined as any person or organization engaged in the sale, consignment, or distribution of goods for sale or resale by a general vendor. This shall not include an owner of goods who personally operates a motor vehicle to transport such goods exclusively to and from a location from which the owner will personally sell such goods in compliance with all applicable laws. For the purpose of this section, public space shall be defined as all publicly owned property between the property lines on a street as such property lines are shown on the City map including but not limited to a park, plaza, roadway, shoulder, tree space, sidewalk or parking space between such property lines. It shall also include, but not be limited to, publicly owned or leased land, buildings, piers, wharfs, stadiums, and terminals. b. Where the distributor does not personally drive the vehicle, he or she shall cause the driver to carry proof of the distributor's license, which the driver shall furnish upon demand to any officer or agent empowered to enforce the law. No distributor shall permit any driver he or she employs to engage in, on the distributor's behalf, any of the activities for which a license is required unless such driver complies with all regulations promulgated pursuant to this subchapter. c. Each person applying for a distributor's license, or renewal thereof, shall file an application in such form and detail as the commissioner may prescribe and shall pay such license fee as shall be established by the commissioner by regulation. In addition to any other information required, the commissioner shall require the following information: 1. The name and home and business address of the applicant; 2. The name and home and business address of the owner, if other than the applicant, of the goods to be delivered; 3. A description of the type of goods or services to be delivered; 4. Three prints of a full-face photograph of the applicant taken not more than thirty days prior to the date of the application; 5. Proof that the applicant has obtained from the New York state department of taxation and finance a certificate of authority designating the applicant's sales tax identification number; 6. An applicant who is a non-resident of the city shall provide the name and address of a registered agent within the city or designate the commissioner as his or her agent upon whom process or other notification may be served; 7. Any changes in the information provided in an application for an original license or renewal thereof, which arise during the term of the license shall be reported to the commissioner in writing within thirty days. § 20-474.2 Delivery vehicle identification required. a. No person shall engage in any activity for which a distributor's license is required unless the motor vehicle used therefor is identified in the manner prescribed by law or regulation. b. Any vehicle used by a distributor to transport goods to a general vendor must be visually identified by a sign conspicuously displayed on the side of the vehicle. The following information shall be clearly and legibly displayed on such sign: the licensee's name, address, and business telephone number; the words General Vending Distributor; and the department's telephone complaint number. The letters and numerals of such display shall not be less than one and one-half inches in height, with a width of at least one-quarter of an inch, and shall be colored black or white, whichever is most prominent against the background color. c. Signs used to identify delivery vehicles may be removable, but must be securely fastened whenever the vehicle is used to deliver or remove goods to or from a general vendor. The sign must remain securely attached throughout the time it takes to load or unload goods. § 20-474.3 Failure to produce license; presumptive evidence of unlicensed activity. a. In any civil or criminal action or proceeding, failure by a general vendor who is required to be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter to exhibit upon demand a general vendor's license in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter to any police officer or authorized officer or employee of the department or other city agency shall be presumptive evidence that such general vendor is not duly licensed. b. In any civil or criminal action or proceeding, failure by any person who is required to obtain a distributor's license pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, or failure by the driver of such person, to exhibit upon demand a distributor's license in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter to any police officer or authorized officer or employee of the department or other city agency shall be presumptive evidence that such person is not duly licensed. Subchapter 28: Storage Warehouses § 20-475 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter: a. Storage warehouse means a building or structure, or any part thereof, in which a consumer's household goods are received for storage for compensation, except warehouses in which such goods are stored by or on behalf of a merchant for resale or other use in the course of the merchant's business. b. Storage warehouse operator means any person operating any storage warehouse as defined herein. c. Household goods shall mean property commonly used in a household, including but not limited to furniture, clothing and appliances but not including goods stored by, or on behalf of, a merchant for resale or other use in the merchant's business. § 20-476 License required. No person shall operate a storage warehouse without a license. The annual fee for a license or a renewal shall be two hundred ninety-five dollars for the first warehouse and one hundred fifty dollars for each additional warehouse. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the office of each warehouse. § 20-477 Duties of warehouse operator. Every storage warehouse operator shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter and regulations promulgated by the commissioner setting forth requirements for estimates and any other rules and regulations promulgated to implement and enforce this subchapter. § 20-478 Schedule of rates. Every storage warehouse operator shall, upon obtaining a license, file with the department schedules showing the rates and charges for the storage and handling of property in the warehouse, and such schedules shall be kept in convenient form and be open at all times during business hours to public inspection at the warehouse or warehouses and the office of the commissioner. Prior to accepting any goods for storage, the schedule of all rates and charges must be presented to the individual requesting the goods to be stored. One copy of this schedule shall be retained by the individual requesting storage and another shall be signed by such individual and retained by the warehouse operator. Any rate or charge not included on such document may not be collected at a later date. § 20-479 Bond. Each storage warehouse operator shall file before receipt of a warehouse license and maintain with the department a surety bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars executed by the storage warehouse operator as principal, and a surety company authorized to do business in this city as surety, payable to the city of New York and conditioned upon the storage warehouse operator's compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and any regulations duly promulgated and upon the further conditions that the licensee will pay to the city any fine, penalty or other obligation within thirty days of its imposition and faithfully account in the manner required by law to the owners of all goods, wares, or other property that the storage warehouse operator receives, handles, stores or otherwise deals in as a storage warehouse operator. The commissioner may increase the amount of the bond required of storage warehouse operators. § 20-480 Insurance. Every warehouse operator shall offer insurance to each customer in accordance with terms and conditions to be determined by the commissioner but in no event shall any goods be insured for less than the amount established by the commissioner. All customers shall be informed of the minimum insurance rate and the availability of greater insurance and the charges made for such additional insurance. § 20-481 Form contract. The commissioner may establish a form contract for use by all warehouse operators. § 20-482 Deposit of household goods by city representatives. No representative of the city, including but not limited to sheriffs and marshals, shall deposit any household goods in a warehouse that is not licensed pursuant to this subchapter. § 20-483 Penalties. a. The commissioner may suspend or revoke the license of any warehouse operator who is found to have committed five or more violations of this subchapter within a two year period. b. In addition to any penalties or remedies provided for in chapter one of this title, a storage warehouse operator who shall violate or fail to comply with any provisions of this subchapter or who fails, omits or neglects to obey, observe or comply with any order, rule, direction, demand or requirement of the department or who shall fail to maintain and comply with the schedule of rates and charges filed shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed the sum of one thousand dollars for each and every offense. Every violation of any such order, rule, direction, demand or requirement of the department, or of any provision of this subchapter, shall be a separate and distinct offense and in case of a continuing violation, every day's continuance thereof shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. c. Any person who is not a licensed warehouse operator under the provisions of this subchapter who shall operate a warehouse shall be subject to a penalty of one thousand dollars for each day of operation without a license. d. Any person who is not a licensed warehouse operator who shall advertise, represent in any manner, or claim to operate a storage warehouse shall be subject to a penalty of one thousand dollars. e. Any person who shall willfully make any false entry in the accounts or in any record or memorandum kept by a storage warehouse operator, who shall willfully destroy or falsify a record of any such account, record, or memorandum, or who shall willfully neglect or fail to make full, true or correct entries in such accounts, records, or memoranda of all facts and transactions pertaining to the business of the warehouse operator or shall keep any accounts or records with the intent to evade the provisions of this subchapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment of not more than thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Subchapter 29: Electronics Stores § 20-484 Definitions. a. Electronics store shall mean a commercial establishment which sells or offers for sale to the public electronic goods. b. Electronic goods shall mean any of the following types of merchandise: 1. audio equipment; 2. calculators; 3. photographic equipment; 4. video equipment; or 5. computer equipment. c. Display space shall mean the area of a retail establishment in which merchandise is publicly displayed and offered for sale and which is generally accessible to customers. d. Audio equipment shall mean any apparatus or equipment that is used for sound reproduction, including but not limited to amplifiers, phonographs, radios, receivers, speakers, compact disc players, tape players, tape recorders and turntables. Audio equipment does not include prerecorded or blank audio recording tapes or records. e. Photographic equipment shall mean any apparatus or equipment that is used for the taking, developing or enlarging of photographs or moving pictures, including but not limited to cameras, video cameras, camera cases, lenses, tripods and developing equipment. Photographic equipment does not include film or film processing. f. Video equipment shall mean televisions and any apparatus or equipment used in the process of producing images on a television set, including but not limited to video disc players, video game units, video tape players and video tape recorders. Video equipment does not include prerecorded video discs and tapes, blank video tapes or video game cartridges. g. Computer equipment shall mean computers, word processors and any apparatus or equipment that is used for computing or word processing, including but not limited to printers, modems, monitors, keyboards, disk drives and peripherals. Computer equipment does not include disks, diskettes or computer paper. § 20-485 License required. No person shall maintain or operate an electronics store without first having obtained a license therefor issued pursuant to section 20-485.2 of this subchapter. § 20-485.1 Application; fee; term. a. An application for any license required under this subchapter or for any renewal thereof shall be made to the commissioner in such form or manner as he or she shall prescribe by rule. b. There shall be a biennial fee for a license to maintain or operate an electronics store. Such fee for a license to maintain or operate an electronics store shall be three hundred and forty dollars. § 20-485.2 Issuance of license. A license to maintain or operate an electronics store shall be granted in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and any rules promulgated by the commissioner thereunder. The commissioner may refuse to issue to an applicant any license required under this subchapter based upon a determination made after due notice and opportunity to be heard that such applicant has engaged in conduct which would constitute a basis for license suspension or revocation as set forth in section 20-485.3 of this subchapter. § 20-485.3 Renewal, suspension and revocation of licenses. In addition to any powers of the commissioner and not in limitation thereof, the commissioner may refuse to renew any license required under this subchapter and may suspend or revoke any such license, after due notice and the opportunity to be heard, upon the occurrence of any one or more of the following conditions: a. The person holding a license to maintain or operate an electronics store or where applicable its officers, principals, directors, employees or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation have been found to have violated any provision of this subchapter, or section 20-708 of this title, or any rules promulgated thereunder; or b. The person holding a license to maintain or operate an electronics store or where applicable its officers, principals, directors, employees or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation have made a material false statement or concealed a material fact in connection with the filing of any application pursuant to this subchapter or have been found to have committed fraud or misrepresentation upon a customer; or c. The person holding a license to maintain or operate an electronics store or where applicable its officers, principals, directors, employees or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation have been found to have engaged in untrue, misleading or deceptive advertising, or deceptive or unconscionable trade practices as described in chapter five of title twenty of this code and any rules promulgated thereunder; or d. The person holding a license to maintain or operate an electronics store or where applicable its officers, principals, directors, employees or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation have not paid, within the time permitted by law, any civil penalty or judgment duly imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter or any rule promulgated thereunder. § 20-485.4 Transferability. No license issued under this subchapter shall be transferred or assigned to any person or used by any person other than the licensee to whom it was issued. § 20-485.5 Duties of licensees. a. Posting of information. Every person holding a license to maintain or operate an electronics store shall conspicuously post such license. b. Display of selling price. 1. All merchandise sold, exposed for sale or offered for sale at retail in a store licensed under this subchapter shall have conspicuously displayed, at the point of exposure or offering for sale, the total selling price exclusive of tax by means of a stamp, tag or label attached to the item, or a sign at the point of display which indicates the item to which the price refers; provided that this information is plainly visible, without the assistance of store personnel. 2. This subdivision shall not apply to merchandise displayed in the window of the electronics store. 3. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 20-485.6 of this subchapter, the civil penalties imposed for a violation of this subdivision shall be those provided for violations of section 20-708 of this title; except that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of subdivision b of section 20-485.5 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of subdivision b of section 20-485.5 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. c. Receipts. Receipts must be provided for any retail purchase if the amount of the purchase is twenty dollars or more. Receipts must be provided on request for any retail purchase if the amount of the purchase is between five and twenty dollars. Such receipts shall contain: 1. the amount of money paid for each item; 2. the total amount of money paid including a separate statement of tax; 3. the date of the purchase; 4. the name and address of the electronics store as listed on the license; 5. the license number of the licensee; and 6. a full description of each item purchased, including the type, color, size; the style or model number and year; and the brand name and manufacturer's name. d. Records. Every person licensed to maintain or operate an electronics store shall maintain records, ledgers, receipts, bills and such other written records as the commissioner may prescribe by rule. Such records shall be made available for inspection by the commissioner at his or her request at either the licensee's place of business or at the offices of the department. 6 Violations. a. The civil penalties imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other sanctions and orders which may be imposed by the commissioner pursuant to this title including but not limited to such sanctions and orders which may be imposed pursuant to section 20-105 of this code. b. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions a and b of section 20-106 and except as provided in paragraph 3 of subdivision b of section 20-485.5, any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred seventy-five dollars for the first violation, three hundred dollars for the second violation and five hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent violation, to be recovered in a civil action; except that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of subdivision a of section 20-485.5 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of subdivision a of section 20-485.5 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. c. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of subdivision c of section 20-485.5 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The notice of violation for such first-time violation shall inform the respondent of the provision of law or rule that the department believes the respondent has violated, describe the condition or activity that is the basis for the notice of violation, and advise the respondent that the law authorizes civil penalties for such violation and that subsequent violations may result in the imposition of such civil penalties. Any person who violates subdivision c of section 20-485.5 or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred seventy-five dollars for a second violation and a civil penalty of three hundred dollars for a third or subsequent violation. § 20-486 Exemptions. The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to: a. any store which uses less than twenty percent of this display space, as measured by linear feet and not square feet, for the display of electronic goods; or b. any store that displays fewer than thirty items that are electronic goods in its display space. § 20-487 Powers of the commissioner. The authority and power of the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter and chapter one of this title shall extend to all sales and advertising activities of an electronics store and shall not be limited to sales and advertising activities relating to the merchandise described in paragraph b of section 20-484 of this subchapter or to merchandise described in any rules of the commissioner promulgated under this sub- chapter. Subchapter 30: Debt Collection Agencies § 20-488 Legislative declaration. The council hereby finds the presence of consumer related problems with respect to the practices of debt collection agencies whose sole concern is the collection of debts owed to their clients. While the majority of those engaged in this business are honest and ethical in their dealings, there is a minority of unscrupulous collection agencies in operation that practice abusive tactics such as threatening delinquent debtors, or calling such people at outrageous times of the night. These actions constitute tactics which would shock the conscience of ordinary people. Due to the sensitive nature of the information used in the course of such agency's everyday business, and the vulnerable position consumers find themselves in when dealing with these agencies, it is incumbent upon this council to protect the interests, reputations and fiscal well-being of the citizens of this city against those agencies who would abuse their privilege of operation. It is herein declared that the city should license debt collection agencies. § 20-489 Definitions. a. Debt collection agency shall mean a person engaged in business the principal purpose of which is to regularly collect or attempt to collect debts owed or due or asserted to be owed or due to another and shall also include a buyer of delinquent debt who seeks to collect such debt either directly or through the services of another by, including but not limited to, initiating or using legal processes or other means to collect or attempt to collect such debt. The term does not include: (1) any officer of employee of a creditor while, in the name of the creditor, collecting debts for such creditor; (2) any officer or employee of a debt collection agency; (3) any person while acting as a debt collection agency for another person, both of whom are related by common ownership or affiliated by corporate control, if the person acting as a debt collection agency does so only for persons to whom it is so related or affiliated and if the principal business of such person is not the collection of debts; (4) any person while serving or attempting to serve legal process on any other person in connection with the judicial enforcement of any debt; (5) any attorney-at-law or law firm collecting a debt in such capacity on behalf of and in the name of a client solely through activities that may only be performed by a licensed attorney, but not any attorney-at-law or law firm or part thereof who regularly engages in activities traditionally performed by debt collectors, including, but not limited to, contacting a debtor through the mail or via telephone with the purpose of collecting a debt or other activities as determined by rule of the commissioner; (6) any person employed by a utility regulated under the provisions of the public service law, acting for such utility; (7) any person collecting or attempting to collect any debt owed or due or asserted to be owed or due another to the extent such activity (i) is incidental to a bona fide fiduciary obligation or a bona fide escrow agreement; (ii) concerns a debt which was originated by such person; (iii) concerns a debt which was not in default at the time it was obtained by such person as a secured party in a commercial credit transaction involving the creditor; (8) any officer or employee of the United States, any state thereof or any political subdivision of any state to the extent that collecting or attempting to collect any debt owed is in the performance of his or her official duties; (9) any non-profit organization which, at the request of consumers, performs bona fide consumer credit counseling and assists customers in the liquidation of their debts by receiving payments from such customers and distributing such amounts to creditors. b. The term child support means a sum to be paid by either or both parents pursuant to court order or decree or pursuant to a valid agreement between the parties for care, maintenance and education of a child. c. The term consumer means any natural person obligated or allegedly obligated to pay any debt. d. The term debt means any obligation or alleged obligation of a consumer to pay money arising out of a transaction in which the money, property, insurance, or services which are the subject of the transaction are primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, whether or not such obligation has been reduced to judgment, or any obligation or alleged obligation arising out of a judgment or valid agreement for the payment of child support. § 20-490 License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a debt collection agency without first having obtained a license in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, and without first being in compliance with all other applicable law, rules and regulations. § 20-491 License term; fees. a. All licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for two years unless sooner suspended or revoked. The commissioner shall establish by regulation the expiration date of such licenses. b. The annual fee for a license or renewal thereof shall be seventy-five dollars. § 20-492 Applications. a. Each person applying for a debt collection agency license or renewal thereof shall file an application in such form and detail as the commissioner may prescribe and shall pay the fee required by this subchapter. b. In addition to any other information required, the commissioner shall require the following information: 1. The name and address of the applicant. 2. The applicant who is a non-resident of the city shall provide the name and address of a registered agent within the city or designate the commissioner as his or her agent upon whom process or other notification may be served. c. Any debt collection agency subject to the provisions of section 20-494.1 shall furnish to the commissioner a current version of the disclosure form required under section 20-494.1(e) together with a copy of such agency's standard contract for child support payment debt collection services upon applying for a debt collection agency license or renewal thereof. Any contract for child support payment debt collection services shall not be deemed valid or in force and effect until the department has completed a review of and approved a debt collection agency's standard contract, which review shall be completed and approval or disapproval provided within ninety days after submission of such contract to the department. Any amendment or modification of such standard contract or disclosure form shall be provided to the commissioner within sixty days following such amendment or modification. § 20-493 Powers and duties of the commissioner. a. The commissioner may make and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper implementation and enforcement of subchapter. b. In addition to any other powers of the commissioner, not in limitation thereof, the commissioner shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, to investigate any violation thereof, and to investigate the business, business practices and business methods of any debt collection agency, if in the opinion of the commissioner, such investigation is warranted. Each debt collection agency shall be obliged upon the request of the commissioner to supply such information as may be required concerning its business practices or methods or its proposed business practices or methods. c. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this subchapter, and in conducting investigations relating to any violation thereof, and for the purpose of investigating the business or business practices or methods of any debt collection agency, the commissioner, or the commissioner's designee, shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and records, in accordance with the provisions of chapter one of this title. d. For the purpose of this subchapter, licensees may be held responsible for statements, representations, promises or acts of their employees or their agents within the scope of their authority; provided, however, that licensees shall not be held responsible for the statements, representations, promises or acts which are contrary to instructions or which constitute gross negligence or intentional torts unless specifically authorized by the licensee. § 20-493.1 Required collection practices. In addition to any practices required under any federal, state or local law, a debt collection agency shall: a. In any permitted communication with the consumer, provide: i. a call-back number to a phone that is answered by a natural person, ii. the name of the agency, iii. the originating creditor of the debt, iv. the name of the person to call back, and v. the amount of the debt at the time of the communication. b. Confirm in writing to the consumer, within five business days, any debt payment schedule or settlement agreement reached regarding the debt. § 20-493.2 Prohibited collection practices. In addition to any practices prohibited under any federal, state or local law, a debt collection agency shall not: a. Attempt to collect or contact a consumer regarding a debt after such consumer requests verification for such debt until such agency furnishes such consumer written documentation identifying the creditor who originated the debt and itemizing the principal balance of the debt that remains or is alleged to remain due and all other charges that are due or alleged to be due; b. Contact a consumer about or seek to collect a debt on which the statute of limitations for initiating legal action has expired unless such agency first provides the consumer such information about the consumer's legal rights as the commissioner prescribes by rule. § 20-494 Penalties. a. Any person who, after notice and hearing shall be found guilty of violating any provision of this subchapter, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of chapter one of this title and shall be subject to a penalty of not less than seven hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars for each violation provided further, however, that any such person found guilty of having acted as a debt collection agency in violation of section 20-490 of this subchapter shall be subject to an additional penalty of one hundred dollars for each instance in which contact is made with a consumer in violation of such section. b. In addition to any other penalties, if a person is found to have committed repeated, multiple or persistent violations of any provision of this subchapter, such person may be responsible for the cost of the department's investigation. § 20-494.1 Prohibited and required practices relating to the collection of child support payments. a. For purposes of this section the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Current payment of child support shall mean a payment made pursuant to a schedule arising out of a judgment or valid agreement for the payment of child support which is made within thirty days of such payment's due date. 2. Potential client shall mean a person seeking child support debt collection services from a debt collection agency. b. Any agreement or contract for the collection of child support payments shall be in writing and shall not extend beyond twelve consecutive months. Renewal of such contracts shall not be automatic and shall require the consent in writing of all parties to the contract. c. No debt collection agency that collects child support payments shall: 1. charge interest or otherwise impose a charge or fee for its services that exceeds fifteen percent of each child support payment collected. 2. charge interest or otherwise impose a charge or fee with respect to child support payments collected primarily through the efforts of a governmental entity. 3. charge interest or otherwise impose a charge or fee for a current payment of child support. 4. impose a charge or fee for the costs of an application. 5. impose a charge or fee for legal services unless paid to an independent firm, practitioner or agency for actual costs incurred and unless agreed upon in writing by the potential client. 6. impose a charge or fee for the termination of a contract for the collection of child support. 7. impose a charge or fee that does not bear a reasonable relationship to the amount of child support actually collected. 8. designate a current payment of child support as arrears. 9. prohibit the termination of a contract for the collection of child support payments until arrears are paid. 10. include any terms in a contract for the collection of child support that conflict or are inconsistent with the terms set out in this subchapter. d. an agreement for the collection of child support shall terminate automatically if no payment of child support has been collected by such debt collection agency for a period of six consecutive months. e. Any debt collection agency that collects child support payments shall provide to a potential client a written disclosure form at the same time as such agency first furnishes such potential client with any informational or promotional materials, application or contract for services, regardless of the manner in which such materials are provided including, but not limited to, in- person contact, fax, regular mail, internet or other electronic means, containing, but not limited to, the following information prominently disclosed in a meaningful sequence: 1. No obligation. A potential client shall be advised that such client is under no obligation to hire a debt collection agency to collect child support payments on behalf of such client and that: (i) New York city's office of child support enforcement (OCSE) provides child support enforcement services at no cost to families regardless of income and (ii) OCSE's powers include, but are not limited to, garnishments against wages, liens on bank accounts and property, tax refund intercepts and the initiation of incarceration proceedings. 2. Fees. (i) Application fees. A potential client shall be advised that child support debt collection agencies are prohibited by law from charging a fee for the costs of an application. (ii) Prohibition against collection fees for child support payments that are not in arrears. A potential client shall be advised that debt collection agencies are prohibited by law from collecting fees for child support payments that are not in arrears and that it is unlawful for such an agency to designate a current payment of child support as arrears. (iii) Legal fees. A potential client shall be advised that child support debt collection agencies are prohibited by law from charging for legal services unless such fees are paid to an independent firm, practitioner or agency for actual costs incurred and unless agreed upon in writing by the potential client. (iv) Early termination penalty. A potential client shall be advised that child support debt collection agencies are prohibited from imposing a charge or fee for the termination of a contract. (v) Additional fees. A potential client shall be advised regarding any additional fees or potential additional fees, including but not limited to, the services for which such fees may be imposed, how such fees are calculated and when such fees are billed. A potential client shall also be advised that any fees must bear a reasonable relationship to the amount of child support actually collected. (vi) A potential client shall be advised that child support debt collection agencies are prohibited by law from imposing any contract terms that conflict or are inconsistent with the provisions specified in the required disclosure form required under section 20-494.1(e). 3. Contract terms and renewals. (i) A potential client shall be advised that, by law, contracts for the collection of child support payments shall not be entered into for periods of longer than twelve consecutive months. (ii) A potential client shall be advised that renewal of such contracts shall not be automatic and shall require the written consent of all parties to the contract. (iii) A potential client shall be provided a summary of all contract termination provisions, including, but not limited to, the specific date on which such contract shall terminate. If no specific date is provided in the contract, the debt collection agency shall describe how and when such contract will terminate. (iv) A potential client shall be advised that, by law, a contract cannot be renewed if, upon the renewal date, there has been no collection activity for the immediately preceding six consecutive months. f. Any debt collection agency that collects child support payments shall furnish to the commissioner a current version of the disclosure form required under section 20-494.1(e) together with a copy of such agency's standard contract for child support payment debt collection services within sixty days following the effective date of the local law that added such section. g. As a condition to the issuance of a license to provide child support payment debt collection services, each applicant shall furnish to the commissioner a surety bond in the sum of five thousand dollars, payable to the city of New York, executed by such applicant and a surety approved by the commissioner. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder, and upon the further condition that such applicant will pay to the city any fine, penalty or other obligation within thirty days of its imposition, or any final judgment recovered by any person who received child support payment debt collection services from a licensee thereunder and was damaged thereby. The commissioner may, by rule, increase the amount of the surety bond required by this section to an amount not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars. The commissioner may by rule authorize an applicant to, in lieu of a bond, deposit cash to satisfy the requirements of this section in an amount equal to the sum of the surety bond required by this section. h. The commissioner may by rule establish a fund to be administered by the comptroller and authorize an applicant for a license to provide child support payment debt collection services to, in lieu of a bond or cash equivalent, make contributions to such fund to satisfy the requirements of subdivision g of this section. The commissioner may promulgate such rules or regulations as are necessary for the administration of such fund including, but not limited to, rules setting forth the conditions for participation in the fund, the contributions required to be made to the fund and the circumstances under which disbursements will be made from the fund. i. The commissioner may promulgate such rules as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. Subchapter 31: Towing Vehicles § 20-495 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: a. Disabled vehicle shall mean any vehicle for which towing is necessary because of a vehicular accident or for which towing is necessary because of the vehicle's inability to proceed under its own motive power due to reasons other than a vehicular accident. b. Evidence vehicle shall mean any vehicle which is suspected of having been used as a means of committing a crime or employed in aid or furtherance of a crime or held, used or sold in violation of law or which may be required to be held or produced as evidence in a criminal investigation or proceeding. c Person in charge of a vehicle shall mean the operator or owner of a vehicle or any person designated by the owner to contract for the towing or repairing of such vehicle. d. Towing shall mean the driving or other operation of a tow truck, or the offering to transport a vehicle by means of a tow truck. An employee of a repair shop registered pursuant to article twelve-A of the vehicle and traffic law that is not subject to the licensing requirements of this subchapter shall not be deemed to be engaged in towing when such employee test-drives a tow truck that has been repaired or is to be repaired by such repair shop if (1) such tow truck is not owned or operated by such repair shop, (2) such tow truck is not transporting another vehicle, and (3) such test-drive takes place within a one mile radius of such repair shop's premises. e. Tow truck shall mean a vehicle that is equipped with a crane, winch, tow bar, push plate, or other device designed to pull or push a vehicle or to raise a vehicle or the front or rear end thereof. f. Vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle as defined in section one hundred twenty-five of the vehicle and traffic law, a tractor as defined in section one hundred fifty-one-a of such law or a trailer as defined in section one hundred fifty-six of such law. § 20-496 License required. a. Except as otherwise provided in section 20-524 of this subchapter, no person shall engage in towing without having first obtained a license for such towing business issued pursuant to section 20-498 of this subchapter. Such license shall be referred to as a license to engage in towing. No person shall engage in towing without having obtained a license plate for each tow truck issued pursuant to section 20-503 of this subchapter. b. Except as otherwise provided in section 20-524 of this subchapter, no person shall drive or otherwise operate a tow truck or assist in any activity for which a license is required under this subchapter unless such person shall have first obtained a tow truck operator's license issued pursuant to section 20-498 of this chapter. c. No person who is required to obtain a license under subdivision a of this section shall permit or authorize the driving or other operation of a tow truck by a person who does not possess a current, valid tow truck operator's license or whose tow truck operator's license has been suspended or revoked where such license is required under this subchapter. In any prosecution for violation of this subdivision, it shall not be necessary to prove that such person knew or should have known that the operator was unlicensed, and there shall be a rebuttable presumption that such tow truck was driven or otherwise operated with the permission or authorization of such person. In any such prosecution, it shall be an affirmative defense that prior to being cited for such violation, such person registered such tow truck operator with the department in accordance with the procedures prescribed by rule of the commissioner and the department did not send notification to such person that such tow truck operator lacked a current, valid tow truck operator's license or that such operator's license had been suspended or revoked. § 20-497 Application; fingerprinting; fee; term. a. An application for any license required under this subchapter or for any renewal thereof shall be made to the commissioner in such form and manner as he or she shall prescribe by regulation. An applicant for any such license shall be fingerprinted by the department for the purpose of securing criminal history records from the state division of criminal justice services. The applicant shall pay a processing fee as required by the state division of criminal justice services. Where the applicant is a sole proprietorship, fingerprints shall be taken of the owner thereof. Where the applicant is a partnership, fingerprints shall be taken of the general partners thereof. Where the applicant is a corporation, fingerprints shall be taken of the officers, principals, directors and stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation. Any person required to be fingerprinted hereunder shall furnish to the department three current passport size photographs of such person. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the commissioner need not require applicants for licenses required under this subchapter to be fingerprinted if criminal history records concerning such applicants are not available from the state division of criminal justice services. b. There shall be a biennial fee for a license to engage in towing and for each tow truck in excess of one operated pursuant to such license. Such fee for a license to engage in towing shall be six hundred dollars and such fee for each tow truck in excess of one shall be six hundred dollars. There shall be a biennial fee for a tow truck operator's license. The fee for such tow truck operator's license shall be twenty dollars. In the event of the loss, mutilation or destruction of any license issued hereunder, the licensee may file such statement and proof of facts as the commissioner shall require, with a fee of fifteen dollars per license, at the department, and the department shall issue a duplicate or substitute license. c. All licenses issued to a business pursuant to this subchapter to engage in towing and all license plates issued pursuant to this subchapter for tow trucks shall expire on April thirtieth, in even numbered years, and all licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter to tow truck drivers to operate tow trucks shall expire on October thirty-first, in even years, unless sooner suspended or revoked. § 20-498 Issuance of license. a. A license to engage in towing shall be issued only where an applicant meets all the requirements of sections 20-499, 20-500, 20-501, 20-502, any criteria in addition thereto established by the commissioner by regulation as he or she deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter and satisfies the commissioner that such applicant possesses good moral character. b. A license to operate a tow truck shall be issued only where an applicant is at least eighteen years of age, satisfies the commissioner that he or she is capable of safely operating a tow truck, meets any additional criteria established by the commissioner by regulation as he or she deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter and satisfies the commissioner that such applicant possesses good moral character. For purposes of determining whether the applicant is capable of safely operating a tow truck, the commissioner may take into consideration any violation by such applicant of the vehicle and traffic law or any other applicable law pertaining to vehicle operation. c. The commissioner may refuse to issue to an applicant any license required under this subchapter based upon a determination made after due notice and opportunity to be heard that such applicant has engaged in conduct which would constitute a basis for license suspension or revocation as set forth in this subchapter. § 20-499 Bond. a. As a condition of the issuance of a license to engage in towing, each applicant shall furnish to the commissioner a surety bond in the sum of five thousand dollars, payable to the city of New York, executed by the applicant and a surety approved by the commissioner. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder, and upon the further condition that the applicant will pay to the city any fine, penalty or other obligation within thirty days of its imposition, or any final judgment recovered by any person who received towing services from a licensee thereunder and was damaged thereby. The commissioner may in his or her discretion, after a public hearing, five days notice of which shall be published in the City Record, increase the amount of the surety bond required by this section to an amount not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars. The commissioner may by regulation authorize an applicant to, in lieu of a bond, deposit cash to satisfy the requirements of this section in an amount equal to the sum of the surety bond required by this section. b. The commissioner may be regulation establish a fund to be administered by the comptroller and authorize an applicant for a license to engage in towing to, in lieu of a bond or cash equivalent, make contributions to such fund to satisfy the requirements of subdivision a of this section. The commissioner may promulgate such rules or regulations as are necessary for the administration of such fund including, but not limited to, regulations setting forth the conditions for participation in the fund, the contributions required to be made to the fund and the circumstances under which disbursements will be made from the fund. § 20-500 Insurance. a. As a condition of the issuance of a license to engage in towing, each applicant shall furnish proof that every tow truck to be used by such applicant under such license is insured under a liability insurance policy as follows: with respect to each tow truck, not less than two hundred thousand dollars for personal injury or death of any one person resulting from any one accident; not less than five hundred thousand dollars for personal injury or death of two or more persons resulting from any one accident; and not less than fifty thousand dollars for injury to or destruction of property of one or more persons resulting from any one accident. b. The licensee shall notify the commissioner of any modification, amendment, cancellation or substitution of any insurance policy required under subdivision a of this section within ten days of notice to the licensee of such modification, amendment, cancellation or substitution. § 20-501 Inspection of tow trucks. a. No license to engage in towing shall be issued pursuant to this subchapter unless the commissioner determines that every tow truck to be used by the applicant under such license is fit for operation as a towing vehicle and is otherwise in compliance with the provisions of the vehicle and traffic law and any regulations promulgated thereunder. b. The commissioner may require by regulation that every tow truck used by a licensee be inspected periodically by the department, and after finding such truck to be fit for operation, may issue a replaceable inspection sticker of such material, form, design and dimension to be affixed to such truck in such manner as he or she shall prescribe. The commissioner may be regulation impose a fee for any inspection in an amount not to exceed fifty dollars in order to defray the costs of conducting any such inspection. c. Where a holder of a license to engage in towing acquires a tow truck subsequent to the date such license was issued intended for use under such license or intends to utilize a truck not previously identified in any application for a license to engage in towing, such licensee shall be prohibited from using such truck for towing until the licensee has furnished proof that such truck is insured as required by section 20-500, and that such truck has been inspected and approved for use by the department pursuant to this section and the commissioner has issued a license plate therefor pursuant to section 20-503 of this subchapter. § 20-502 Premises. No license to engage in towing shall be issued or renewed to any applicant where the premises on or in which the licensed business is to be conducted are not in compliance with the zoning resolution and the building code of the city of New York and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder. § 20-503 Issuance of license plate. Upon approval of an application to engage in towing, the commissioner shall issue to the licensee a license plate for each tow truck to be used under such license. Such license plate shall be securely affixed to a conspicuous and indispensable part of such truck, and shall clearly set forth the license number assigned to the licensee. The license plate issued to the licensee may, in the discretion of the commissioner, be a plate of a permanent nature with a replaceable date tag attached thereto, indicating the expiration date of the plate. Such license and replaceable date tag shall be of such material, form, design and dimension as the commissioner shall prescribe. The commissioner, upon renewal of a license to engage in towing, may continue the use of the license plate for as many additional license terms as he or she may determine, in which event he or she shall issue and deliver to the licensee a replaceable date tag as evidence of renewal of license, which shall be attached or affixed in such manner as he or she may prescribe. The failure to affix or display such date tag in a manner prescribed by the commissioner shall constitute a violation of this section. In the event of the loss, mutilation or destruction of any license plate or date tag issued hereunder, the licensee may file such statement and proof of facts as the commissioner shall require, with a fee of twenty-five dollars per plate or date tag, at the department, and the department shall issue a duplicate or substitute license plate or date tag. § 20-504 Renewal, suspension and revocation of licenses. After due notice and opportunity to be heard, the commissioner may refuse to renew any license required under this subchapter and may suspend or revoke any such license upon the occurrence of any one or more of the following conditions: a. the person holding a tow truck operator's license, or the person holding a license to engage in towing or where applicable its officers, principals, directors, employees, or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation have been found by the commissioner to have violated any provisions of this subchapter or any rule promulgated thereunder; or b. the person holding a tow truck operator's license, or the person holding a license to engage in towing or where applicable its officers, principals, directors, employees, or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation were found to have operated a tow truck in a grossly negligent manner or in a manner showing a reckless disregard for life or property. For purposes of this subdivision, a finding that any such person violated section eleven hundred ninety-two of the vehicle and traffic law in the course of the operation of a tow truck shall be deemed gross negligence; or c. the person holding a tow truck operator's license, or the person holding a license to engage in towing or where applicable its officers, principals, directors or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation have made a material false statement or concealed a material fact in connection with the filing of any application pursuant to this subchapter or have engaged in fraud or misrepresentation in connection with the rendering of services; or d. the person holding a tow truck operator's license, or the person holding a license to engage in towing or where applicable its officers, principals, directors or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation have not paid, within the time permitted by law, any fine, penalty or judgment duly imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder or duly imposed in connection with or arising from the use or operation of a tow truck or the occupation of the premises on which the licensed business is conducted; or e. the person holding a tow truck operator's license, or the person holding a license to engage in towing or where applicable any of its officers, principals, directors or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation has been convicted of a crime which, in the judgment of the commissioner, has a direct relationship to such person's fitness or ability to perform any of the activities for which a license is required under this subchapter; or has been convicted of any other crime which, in accordance with article twenty-three-a of the correction law, would provide a justification for the commissioner to refuse to renew, or to suspend or revoke, such license; or f. the person holding a tow truck operator's license, or the person holding a license to engage in towing has failed to maintain any of the conditions for issuance of such license as provided under this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder. 1. Mandatory suspension or revocation of license. After due notice and opportunity to be heard, the commissioner shall refuse to renew, or shall suspend or revoke a license required under this subchapter, upon the occurrence of any one or more of the following conditions: a. the person holding a license to engage in towing or where applicable, any of such licensee's officers, principals, directors, employees, or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation, has been found by the commissioner to have unjustifiably refused to release a vehicle towed pursuant to section 20-518 or section 20-519 of this subchapter, to the vehicle's owner or the owner's agent. The commissioner shall establish standards concerning the sufficiency of proof of ownership of the vehicle and the legality of any charges demanded by the licensee for release of the vehicle. In determining whether such refusal is unjustifiable, the commissioner in addition to any other relevant fact shall consider such standards; b. in a two year period, the person holding a license to engage in towing or where applicable, any of such licensee's officers, principals, directors, employees, or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation, has been found by the commissioner to have committed in any combination three or more violations of sections 19-169, 19-169.1 of this code or any rules promulgated thereunder, or sections 20-507, 20-509, 20-509.1, 20-510, 20-512, 20-514, 20-515, 20-516, 20-518, 20-519, 20-520, 20-520.1 or 20-527 of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder; c. the person holding a license to engage in towing or where applicable, any of such licensee's officers, principals, directors, employees, or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation, has been convicted of a misdemeanor or a felony relating to auto stripping in violation of article 165 of the penal law; d. in a two year period, the person holding a tow truck operator's license has been found by the commissioner to have committed in any combination three or more violations of the provisions of sections 19-169 and 19.169.1 of this code and any rules promulgated thereunder, or sections 20-510, 20-512, 20-514, 20-515, 20-518, 20-519, 20-520, 20-520.1 or 20-527 of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder; e. the person holding a tow truck operator's license has been found to have operated any motor vehicle in violation of section eleven hundred ninety- two of the vehicle and traffic law during the license term, or has been found to have operated a tow truck in violation of section eleven hundred eighty-two of the vehicle and traffic law. § 20-505 Tow truck operator's license suspension or revocation; special circumstances. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, where the commissioner has reason to believe that a tow truck operator has committed an act which should provide a basis for suspension or revocation under section 20-504 or 20-504.1 of this subchapter, and the continued possession by such person of a tow truck operator's license would pose a serious danger to the safety of the public, the commissioner may immediately suspend his or her tow truck operator's license. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, upon the suspension or revocation pursuant to the vehicle and traffic law of a license to operate a motor vehicle that is held by a person who also holds a tow truck operator's license pursuant to this subchapter, the commissioner shall immediately suspend his or her tow truck operator's license. Notice of the suspension of a tow truck operator's licence pursuant to this section shall be served on the operator and on the person who employs such operator to operate a tow truck. The commissioner shall provide the operator with the opportunity for a hearing within five days after the notification of suspension, after which the commissioner shall forthwith make a determination as to whether such suspension should continue and in addition may impose any penalty or sanction provided for under this subchapter, provided, however, that where the license to operate a motor vehicle held by a tow truck operator has been revoked pursuant to the vehicle and traffic law, the commissioner shall revoke such person's tow truck operator's license issued pursuant to this subchapter. § 20-506 License revocation. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any person who holds a license issued pursuant to this subchapter which has been revoked by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter shall not be permitted to apply for any new license under this subchapter for a period of three years from the date of such revocation. No license to engage in towing shall be issued pursuant to this subchapter to a corporation, partnership, or other association if an officer, principal, director, or stockholder owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation of the applicant is or has been an officer, principal, director, or stockholder owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation of a licensee that has had a license revoked pursuant to this subchapter and such revocation is in effect at the time of the license application. § 20-507 Posting of information. a. Every person holding a license to engage in towing shall post, in a conspicuous fashion at the area of the licensee's place of business where a vehicle may be claimed, a sign which clearly and legibly states the licensee's name, address and business telephone number, the license number assigned to such business, the rates permitted to be charged for towing and storage under section 20-509 of this subchapter and the department's telephone complaint number. b. The following information shall be clearly and legibly displayed and affixed in the manner provided by rule on each side of every tow truck used under a license to engage in towing: the licensee's name, the address under which the tow truck is licensed with the department, and the business telephone number; such rates permitted to be charged for towing and for storage under section 20-509 of this subchapter as are specified in rules of the commissioner; and the department's telephone complaint number. The letters and numerals of such display shall not be less than one and one-half inches in height, with a width of at least one-quarter of an inch, and shall be colored in a contrasting color which is prominent against the background color and is conspicuously visible when such vehicle is in motion. § 20-508 Storage facilities. Every licensee which stores vehicles shall do so only on premises which meet such specifications as the commissioner shall establish by regulation for safeguarding property. § 20-509 Rates. a. Except as otherwise provided, charges for the towing of vehicles shall not exceed one hundred dollars; provided, however, that where a motor vehicle has been booted by a person licensed pursuant to subchapter 32 of this chapter in a private lot as defined in paragraph 3 of subdivision b of section 20-531 of such subchapter and such vehicle is subsequently towed, no additional charge may be imposed for the towing of such vehicle. b. Except as otherwise provided, charges for storage of vehicles shall not exceed twenty-five dollars for each twenty-four hours or fraction thereof for the first three days of storage and twenty-seven dollars for the fourth day of storage and each day thereafter. c. The commissioner may, by rule, authorize such additional charges for services necessary to prepare a vehicle for towing, including but not limited to charges for additional labor necessary for positioning a vehicle for towing, which in the judgment of the commissioner shall be fair and reasonable. d. (1) No tow truck operator shall require the payment of any fee or charge for towing and storage of a vehicle, or any fee or charge directly or indirectly related to towing and storage of a vehicle, that is not specifically authorized by law or rule. (2) No charge for the towing and storage of vehicles may be imposed by any person who does not have a license to engage in towing as required by this subchapter at the time that the towing and storage services are performed. 1 Rates for arterial tow permittees. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter, charges for the towing of disabled passenger vehicles from an arterial roadway by an arterial tow permittee authorized by the commissioner of transportation or the police commissioner shall be one hundred twenty-five dollars for the first ten miles or fraction thereof and four dollars for each additional mile or fraction thereof. § 20-510 Authorization to tow vehicles. No tow truck operator shall tow any vehicle for which towing is necessary because of a vehicular accident without an authorization signed by the person in charge of the vehicle or a police officer which authorizes the towing of such vehicle and, where applicable, authorizes the storage of such vehicle. The authorization shall be on a form prescribed by the commissioner which shall require such information as the commissioner prescribes by rule, including the following information: the licensee's name, address and business telephone number, the license assigned to such business, the department's telephone complaint number, the rates permitted to be charged for towing and storage under section 20-509 of this subchapter, the location from which and the destination to which the vehicle is to be towed, the year, the make, the model and the department of motor vehicles license plate number of the vehicle to be towed, the name of the person in charge of the vehicle, the time of the request for service and any other information to be prescribed by rule of the commissioner. The form must also contain the following language: This is an authorization for towing and, where requested, for storage and not an authorization to repair. You have the right to have your vehicle repaired at the facility of this towing company or any other establishment of your choice. Every authorization form shall be executed and copies thereof shall be furnished to such parties and in such manner as the commissioner may provide by rule. § 20-511 Removal of vehicles obstructing traffic. When a vehicle is situated so as to constitute an obstruction to traffic, and such vehicle is unattended or the person in charge of such vehicle has not arranged for its removal, a police officer or a person designated by the commissioner of transportation may direct its removal by a person licensed to engage in towing, and such licensee shall remove such vehicle to a storage facility which meets the specifications established by the commissioner by regulation pursuant to section 20-508 of this subchapter. Such licensee shall be entitled to charge the person in charge of the vehicle for towing and storage, and where applicable, for the rendering of services to prepare the vehicle for towing at the rates set forth or authorized by section 20-509 of this subchapter. § 20-512 Obligation to perform service. No person licensed under this subchapter shall refuse, without justifiable grounds, to render towing services in whole or in part to a person in charge of a disabled vehicle, other than a vehicle with a maximum gross vehicle weight of less than fifteen thousand pounds that is involved in a vehicular accident, who has requested towing to a destination within the city. For purposes of this section, justifiable grounds shall include but not be limited to (a) the absence of an authorization by the commissioner of transportation or the police commissioner which is required to lawfully remove a vehicle from a specific location and (b) an authorization by the commissioner of transportation to provide only such towing services as may be specified by such commissioner to remove a vehicle from a specific location. § 20-513 Specific request for services. Repealed. § 20-514 Repairs. a. No licensee under this subchapter or his or her agent shall make repairs or cause repairs to be made for a fee on any vehicle which requires towing because of a vehicular accident and is towed by such licensee, without first entering into a signed agreement with the person in charge of the vehicle authorizing such repairs. The commissioner shall prescribe the form to be used for such agreement. In addition to any other information required to be set forth in such agreement, the commissioner shall require that such agreement set forth the registration number assigned to the licensee's repair shop pursuant to section three hundred ninety-eight-c of the vehicle and traffic law. b. In any case where the tow truck operator knows that the person in charge of a vehicle is injured and is to be removed to a hospital, it shall be unlawful to enter into an agreement authorizing repairs with such injured person until the expiration of a period of at least twenty-four hours from the time of the accident, unless the injured person is not admitted to or has been discharged from the hospital before the expiration of such period. § 20-515 Prohibited acts. The following shall be prohibited: a. maintaining anywhere for use in connection with towing a radio receiving set or other device capable of receiving signals or messages transmitted on the frequencies allocated for police use except in a tow truck for which there exists a current permit issued by the police commissioner pursuant to section 10-102 of the code. In any prosecution for violation of this subdivision, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that such device was used to monitor police transmissions; b. soliciting or offering any inducements or making representations at the scene of a vehicular accident for the towing of any vehicle involved in an accident or for the performance of any repairs on any vehicle involved in an accident except as may be reasonable and necessary at the scene of an accident for the towing of an accident vehicle on a segment of the arterial highways by an arterial tow permittee who has been authorized by the commissioner of transportation or the police commissioner to provide tow service on such segment; c. giving or offering to give any payment, fee, reward, or other thing of value, directly or indirectly, for supplying information concerning a disabled vehicle which may require towing service, which information is or may be used to solicit the towing or repair of such vehicle, or having printed any card or other notice offering to give a payment, fee, reward or other thing of value for such information; or d. at the scene of a vehicular accident, making an estimate of the cost of repairs, offering to make such an estimate, or offering to make repairs, or providing any inducement, discount, reward, or other thing of value to encourage, urge or steer any person to have such accident vehicle towed to a repair facility or to have such accident vehicle repaired at a particular repair facility. § 20-516 Records. Every person licensed to engage in towing shall maintain records, ledgers, receipts, bills and such other written records as the commissioner may prescribe by regulation in electronic format. Such records shall be made available for inspection by the commissioner at his or her request at either the licensee's place of business or at the offices of the department for a period of five years. § 20-517 Transferability. No license issued under this subchapter shall be transferred or assigned to any person or used by any person other than the licensee to whom it was issued. § 20-518 Removal of vehicles involved in an accident. a. 1. The commissioner shall establish and administer a program to be known as the directed accident response program for the purpose of removing vehicles that have been involved in a vehicular accident and which cannot be safely driven under their own power. The commissioner may by rule prescribe which vehicles involved in vehicular accidents cannot be safely driven under this own power. 2. The commissioner, after consultation with the police commissioner, shall divide the city into zones and shall create for each zone a list in random order of persons licensed to engage in towing who have been approved by the commissioner for participation in the directed accident response program. At any time subsequent to the initial establishment of zones and lists, the commissioner may, after consultation with the police commissioner, modify the zones and reformulate the lists to ensure sufficient towing services throughout the city. Where more than one towing company has been placed on a list of towing companies authorized to remove vehicles in a particular zone, the police department shall summon towing companies from such list on a rotating basis. Any towing company approved for participation in such program after such lists are initially established shall be placed on any such list at the point immediately preceding the last towing company summoned by the police department pursuant to this section. Such lists shall be available at the department for public inspection. 3. The commissioner shall set forth by rules such criteria for participation in the program as he or she deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section. Such criteria shall include but not be limited to, possession of a valid, current license to engage in towing and compliance with this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder, ability to respond within a specified period of time to police department calls for towing, ability to make service available on a twenty-four hour basis or on such limited basis as the commissioner shall prescribe, maintenance of specified business hours for redemption of vehicles and maintenance of a specified minimum number of tow trucks and other equipment appropriate for towing, including at least one flat- bed truck suitable for removing accident vehicles. All participants in the program shall maintain a business premises that is under the exclusive control of the participant, is not used by any other towing company and is the premises listed on such participant's license to engage in towing. Such premises shall consist of a location that is open to the public, where towing company personnel are employed, calls requesting towing service are received and towers are dispatched, and where all records required by this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder are maintained. 4. All persons approved by the commissioner for participation in the directed accident response program, in addition to meeting the requirements of paragraph three of this subdivision and any rule promulgated pursuant to this section, shall (i) have been licensed pursuant to this subchapter for a period of not less than one year; (ii) have not had such license revoked after due notice and opportunity to be heard at any time during the preceding two year period; and (iii) possess a satisfactory record with regard to the operation of a towing business as determined by the commissioner, provided that a determination that such record with regard to the operation of a towing business is unsatisfactory shall be based upon violations of this subchapter. 5. The commissioner may impose a biennial fee for participation in the program in order to defray expenses incurred in its administration. b. 1. Any vehicle that has been involved in a vehicular accident and which cannot be safely driven under its own power which has not been removed or caused to be removed from the scene of an accident shall be removed by a tow truck of the towing company participating in the directed accident response program when such company has been directed to do so by the police department. No such vehicle, other than a vehicle that has a maximum gross vehicle weight of at least fifteen thousand pounds, may be removed by a tow operator chosen by the person in charge of such vehicle. 2. No tow truck operator shall travel en route to, or respond to, the scene or the reported scene of a vehicular accident, or remove a vehicle therefrom, unless a specific request for the services of such tow truck operator has been received by such operator or the towing company which employs such operator from a person in charge of a vehicle that has a maximum gross vehicle weight of at least fifteen thousand pounds, or unless such tow truck operator has been directed to do so by the police department. 3. No tow truck of the towing company participating in the directed accident response program shall fail to or refuse to remove a vehicle that has been involved in a vehicular accident and which cannot be safely driven under its own power when such company has been directed to do so by the police department. Such vehicle shall be towed to the storage facility of such responding company which meets such specifications as the commissioner shall establish by rule, or to a location within the city designated by the person in charge of such vehicle, provided, however, that placement of such vehicle in such location is not in violation of any other law. A vehicle towed to a storage facility shall at all times be stored within such storage facility while the vehicle is in the custody of the towing company. Such storage facility shall be the premises listed on the license of the towing company responding to the police department's direction to remove a vehicle or the premises approved by the commissioner for use by such towing company. Such premises shall be owned, operated or controlled by such towing company and shall not be used by any other towing company. Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude a person in charge of a vehicle that has a maximum gross vehicle weight of at least fifteen thousand pounds from arranging for the removal of such vehicle by a tow operator of such person's choice. 4. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, a towing company that removes an accident vehicle to its storage facility at the place of business which qualifies such company for participation in the directed accident response program or to its auxiliary storage facilities approved by the commissioner, shall not charge for the towing of a vehicle registered at a weight of ten thousand pounds or less a fee exceeding one hundred and twenty- five dollars or more than twenty-five dollars per day for the first three days of storage and twenty-seven dollars for the fourth day, and each day thereafter, of storage for such vehicle. A towing company participating in the directed accident response program shall not charge for the towing of an accident vehicle registered at a weight of more than ten thousand pounds a fee exceeding one hundred and forty dollars or more than twenty-five dollars per day for the first three days of storage and twenty-seven dollars for the fourth day, and each day thereafter, of storage for such vehicle. 5. If a person in charge of the vehicle, other than a police officer, requests that an accident vehicle be towed to any location other than the storage facilities at the place of business which qualified the towing company removing the vehicle for participation in the directed accident response program or to its auxiliary storage facilities approved by the commissioner, the towing company may also, in addition to the charges authorized under paragraph four of this subdivision, charge the mileage fee for additional mileage that is authorized under section 20-509 of this subchapter, for the distance traveled from the accident scene to the location where the vehicle is towed; provided, however, that such distance shall be measured on a route available for commercial vehicles from the accident scene to the location to which such vehicle is towed. c. The police department shall maintain a record of the number of times each towing company participating in the directed accident response program is summoned to remove vehicles and the number of times each such company responds thereto and such other information as the commissioner may prescribe. c-1. Every towing company approved to participate in the directed accident response program shall: (1) have on its premises, and accessible to the public, a telephone and bathroom facilities; (2) provide reasonable access to an accident vehicle during the hours the towing company is required to be open for the redemption of vehicles, at no charge, to the owner or other person in charge of such vehicle, to any insurance agent or insurance adjuster representing the owner of such vehicle, or to any insurance agent or insurance adjuster who furnishes sufficient written proof confirming that he or she is in fact representing any other person having a claim or defense arising from an accident involving such vehicle; (3) (a) impose no storage charge exceeding the amount permitted pursuant to section 20-509 of this subchapter during any period before the owner or other person in charge of an accident vehicle has signed an authorization for the repair of such accident vehicle with the repair shop that the towing company has registered pursuant to article twelve-A of the vehicle and traffic law, and (b) where such towing company is registered as a repair shop pursuant to article twelve-A of the vehicle and traffic law, impose no storage charge during the period from which the owner or other person in charge of the accident vehicle has authorized repairs by such registered repair shop to one business day after such registered repair shop has notified such owner or other such person in charge of such vehicle to pick up the repaired vehicle. For purposes of determining whether a towing company has violated subparagraphs (a) or (b) of this paragraph, such towing company shall be deemed to have committed the violation of another entity if such towing company and such other entity share a common officer, director, partner, member, manager, principal or shareholder owning five or more percent of the outstanding stock, such towing company has any direct or indirect interest in such other entity, or such towing company and such other entity share any facilities, equipment, or employees. (4) provide to each owner or other person in charge of the accident vehicle an informational flyer entitled the consumer bill of rights regarding towing of accident vehicles and repair shops setting forth the information that the commissioner deems appropriate about the laws relating to the consumer's rights with respect to the towing and repairing of vehicles. Such bill of rights shall be provided to the owner or other person in charge of the accident vehicle before such vehicle is towed from the accident scene; provided, however, that if the owner or other person in charge of such vehicle is injured and is to be removed to a hospital, such bill of rights shall be furnished by the towing company at the time such owner or such other person in charge of such vehicle first appears at the premises of such towing company. d. In addition to the obligation to make records available for inspection by the commissioner pursuant to section 20-516 of this subchapter, every towing company participating in the directed accident response program shall, at the request of the police department and for the purpose of the enforcement of any regulations promulgated pursuant to this section, make available for inspection by the police department, during reasonable business hours, any records required to be maintained under this subchapter. e. After due notice and opportunity to be heard, the commissioner may disqualify any towing company participating in the directed accident response program from continued participation in such program for violation of any of the provisions of this section or any rule promulgated hereunder or upon the occurrence of any one or more of the conditions set forth in this subchapter which constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of any license issued under this subchapter; provided, however, that the commissioner, for good cause, may, prior to giving notice and an opportunity to be heard, temporarily suspend a towing company from participation in the directed accident response program for up to ten days. Notice of such suspension shall be served on the towing company. The commissioner shall provide the towing company with the opportunity for a hearing within ten days after the notification of suspension, after which the commissioner shall forthwith make a determination as to whether such suspension should continue and the length of such suspension and in addition may impose any penalty or sanction authorized by this subchapter. f. Any person participating in the directed accident response program who violates the provisions of section 20-496 of this subchapter regarding engaging in towing without having first obtained a license for such towing business and a license plate for each tow truck, driving or otherwise operating a tow truck or assisting in any activity for which a license is required under this subchapter without having first obtained a tow truck operator's license, or permitting or authorizing the driving or other operation of a tow truck by a person who does not possess a current, valid tow truck operator's license in violation of subdivision c of section 20-496 of this subchapter shall be removed from the list of approved towing companies and shall be ineligible for participation in the directed accident response program for a period of six months. Any such person who has been found guilty of two such violations within the preceding twenty-four month period shall be removed from the list of approved towing companies and shall be ineligible for participation in the directed accident response program for a period of one year. g. The commissioner may promulgate such additional rules and regulations as he or she deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section. g-1. 1. After due notice and opportunity to be heard, the commissioner may remove or suspend, for a period not to exceed one year, from continued participation in the directed accident response program any towing company participating in such program which: (a) was unavailable to respond to a police dispatch or has failed to respond to a police dispatch for removing a vehicle from the scene of an accident on at least three occasions within any six month period; (b) failed to provide to any person the informational flyer entitled consumer bill of rights regarding towing of accident vehicles and repair shops as required pursuant to paragraph four of subdivision c-1 of this section; or (c) failed to or refused to release any accident vehicle after presentation of sufficient proof of ownership or owner's written authorization, and upon tender of payment of authorized charges in cash or by major credit card as such credit card payment is provided for in section 20-520.1 of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder. 2. The grounds for suspension or removal of a towing company from continued participation in the directed accident response program specified in paragraph one of this subdivision shall be in addition to, and shall not in any way limit, the commissioner's authority to revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew a license issued pursuant to this subchapter or to suspend or remove from participation any towing company from the directed accident response program pursuant to any other provisions of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder. h. Expired. i. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the removal of a vehicle at any location for which the authorization of the commissioner of transportation or the police commissioner is required to remove a disabled vehicle therefrom. § 20-518.1 Special accident response districts. Expired. § 20-519 Removal of stolen, abandoned and evidence vehicles, vehicles blocking a private driveway and vehicles with certain alarm devices. a. 1. The commissioner shall establish a program to be known as the rotation tow program for the purpose of removing evidence vehicles, vehicles suspected of having been stolen or abandoned other than vehicles described in subdivision two of section twelve hundred twenty-four of the vehicle and traffic law, the removal pursuant to section 19-169 of the code of vehicles blocking a private driveway, and the removal pursuant to section 24-221 of the code of vehicles with certain alarm devices. 2. The commissioner, after consultation with the police commissioner, shall divide the city into zones and shall create for each zone a list in random order of persons licensed to engage in towing who have been approved by the commissioner for participation in the rotation tow program. The commissioner may in his or her discretion create from such list separate lists for the removal of evidence vehicles, stolen and abandoned vehicles, the removal pursuant to section 19-169 of the code of vehicles blocking a private driveway, and the removal pursuant to section 24-221 of the code of vehicles with certain alarm devices, respectively. At any time subsequent to the initial establishment of zones and lists, the commissioner may, after consultation with the police commissioner, modify the zones and reformulate the lists to ensure sufficient towing services throughout the city. Where more than one towing company has been placed on a list of towing companies authorized to remove vehicles in a particular zone, the police department shall summon towing companies from such list on a rotating basis. Any towing company approved for participation in such program after such lists are initially established shall be placed on any such list at the point immediately preceding the last towing company summoned by the police department pursuant to this section. Such lists shall be available at the department for public inspection. 3. The commissioner shall set forth by rule such criteria for participation in the program as he or she deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section. Such criteria shall include, but not be limited to, possession of a valid, current license to engage in towing and compliance with this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder, ability to respond within a specified period of time to police department calls for towing, ability to make service available on a twenty-four hour basis or on such limited basis as the commissioner shall prescribe, maintenance of specified business hours for redemption of vehicles and maintenance of a specified minimum number of tow trucks and other equipment appropriate for towing. All participants in the program shall maintain a business premises that is under the exclusive control of the participant, is not used by any other towing company and is the premises listed on such participant's license to engage in towing. Such premises shall consist of location that is open to the public, where towing company personnel are employed, calls requesting towing service are received and towers are dispatched, and where all records required by this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder are maintained. 4. The commissioner may impose a biennial fee for participation in the program in order to defray expenses incurred in its administration. 5. On or after March first, nineteen hundred ninety-three, all persons approved by the commissioner for participation in the rotation tow program, in addition to meeting the requirements of paragraph three of this subdivision and any rule promulgated pursuant to this section, shall (i) have been licensed pursuant to this subchapter for a period of not less than one year; (ii) have not had such license revoked after due notice and opportunity to be heard at any time during the preceding two year period; and (iii) possess a satisfactory record with regard to the operation of a towing business as determined by the commissioner, provided that a determination that such record with regard to the operation of a towing business is unsatisfactory shall be based upon violations of this subchapter. b. 1. Any vehicle that is suspected of having been stolen or abandoned other than vehicles described in subdivision two of section twelve hundred twenty-four of the vehicle and traffic law, any vehicle that is blocking a private driveway and subject to removal pursuant to section 19-169 of the code, and any vehicle with certain alarm devices which is subject to removal pursuant to section 24-221* of the code shall be removed by a tow truck of the towing company participating in the rotation tow program when directed to do so by the police department. If such vehicle appears to have a missing or altered vehicle identification number, the police may direct its removal to the police property clerk. All other vehicles shall be towed to the storage facility of such responding company which meets such specifications as the commissioner shall establish by rule, and shall at all times be stored within such storage facility while the vehicle is in the custody of the towing company. Such storage facility shall be the premises listed on the license of the towing company responding to the police department's direction to remove a vehicle or the premises approved by the commissioner for use by such towing company. Such premises shall be owned, operated or controlled by such towing company and shall not be used by any other towing company. The police department shall expeditiously make every reasonable effort to notify the owner and the national automobile theft bureau or the insurer, if any, of any vehicle that is suspected of having been stolen or abandoned of the vehicle's location and the procedure for retrieval. During the period commencing on the eighth day after the vehicle is removed to such storage facility and ending on the thirtieth day after such removal, such towing company shall transfer any vehicle which has not been claimed into the custody of the police department property clerk. 2. An evidence vehicle shall be removed by a towing company participating in the rotation tow program when directed to do so by the police department. Such vehicle shall be towed to a location designated by a police officer. 3. No tow truck operator shall knowingly remove a vehicle suspected of having been stolen or abandoned or an evidence vehicle without authorization by the police department. No tow truck operator shall knowingly remove a vehicle blocking a private driveway subject to removal pursuant to section 19-169 of the code except as authorized in such section. No tow truck operator shall knowingly remove a vehicle with certain alarm devices subject to removal pursuant to section 24-221* of the code except as authorized in such section. c. 1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the towing company shall be entitled to charge the owner or other person claiming a vehicle that is suspected of having been stolen or abandoned or a vehicle with certain alarm devices subject to removal pursuant to section 24-221* of the code which was directed to be towed by the police department pursuant to this section and which is claimed before the end of the thirtieth day after such vehicle is removed by such towing company amounts not in excess of the following: one hundred twenty-five dollars for the towing of a vehicle registered at a weight of ten thousand pounds or less; one hundred and forty dollars for the towing of a vehicle registered at a weight of more than ten thousand pounds; twenty-five dollars per day for the first three days and twenty-seven dollars for the fourth day of storage and each day thereafter. Upon the transfer of an unclaimed vehicle into the custody of the police department property clerk, the towing company shall be entitled to charge the police department amounts not in excess of the following: sixty dollars plus tolls for the towing of a vehicle suspected of having been stolen or abandoned, a vehicle that was blocking a private driveway and was removed pursuant to section 19-169 of the code or a vehicle with certain alarm devices that was removed pursuant to section 24-221* of the code, to a storage facility and subsequent transfer of such vehicle into the custody of such property clerk during the period of time specified in paragraph one of subdivision b of this section; five dollars per day for the first three days of storage of such vehicle and eight dollars for the fourth day of storage and each day thereafter, provided that in no event shall any towing company be entitled to charge the police department for storage charges incurred after the tenth day of storage. The towing company shall be entitled to charge the police department an amount not in excess of sixty dollars plus tolls for the towing of an evidence vehicle to a location designated by a police officer. 2. The police department shall be entitled to charge an owner or other person who claims a vehicle that is suspected of having been stolen or abandoned, a vehicle that was blocking a private driveway and was removed pursuant to section 19-169 of the code, or a vehicle with certain alarm devices that was removed pursuant to section 24-221* of the code, which is in the custody of the police department property clerk the charge for towing and storage permitted to be charged by the towing company pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision, plus tolls, in addition to the fees for storage with the police department property clerk provided by subdivision i of section 14-140 of the code. No vehicle which is in the custody of the police department property clerk which had blocked a private driveway and was removed pursuant to section 19-169 of the code shall be released to the owner or other person claiming such vehicle unless such owner or other person shall, in addition to paying such charges to the police department property clerk as provided for in this subdivision, present to such property clerk a receipt from the towing company which removed the vehicle indicating payment to such company of the following amount: the charges for towing and storage which would have been due to the towing company pursuant to paragraph eight of subdivision c of section 19-169 of the code had such owner or other person claimed the vehicle from such towing company less the amount paid to the police department for the towing and storage of such vehicle by such company. 3. No towing company shall require the payment of any fee or charge for or relating to towing and storage of a vehicle, or any fee or charge directly or indirectly related to towing and storage of a vehicle, that has been removed pursuant to this section, that is not specifically authorized by law or rule. d. The police department shall maintain a record of the number of times each towing company participating in the rotation tow program is summoned to remove a vehicle and the number of times each such company responds thereto and such other information as the commissioner may prescribe by rule. e. In addition to the obligation to make records available for inspection by the commissioner pursuant to section 20-516 of this subchapter, every towing company participating in the rotation tow program shall, at the request of the police department and for the purpose of the enforcement of any rules promulgated pursuant to this section, make available for inspection by the police department, during reasonable business hours, any records required to be maintained under this subchapter. f. After due notice and opportunity to be heard, the commissioner may disqualify any towing company participating in the rotation tow program from continued participation in such program for violation of any of the provisions of this section or any rule promulgated hereunder or upon the occurrence of any one or more of the conditions set forth in this subchapter which constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of any license issued under this subchapter; provided, however, that the commissioner, for good cause, may, prior to giving notice and an opportunity to be heard, temporarily suspend a towing company from participation in the rotation tow program for up to ten days. Notice of such suspension shall be served on the towing company. The commissioner shall provide the towing company with the opportunity for a hearing within ten days after the notification of suspension, after which the commissioner shall forthwith make a determination as to whether such suspension should continue and the length of such suspension, and in addition may impose any penalty or sanction authorized by this subchapter. g. Any person participating in the rotation tow program who violates the provisions of section 20-496 of this subchapter regarding engaging in towing without having first obtained a license for such towing business and a license plate for each tow truck, driving or otherwise operating a tow truck or assisting in any activity for which a license is required under this subchapter without having first obtained a tow truck operator's license, or permitting or authorizing the driving or other operation of a tow truck by a person who does not possess a current, valid tow truck operator's license in violation of subdivision c of section 20-496 of this subchapter shall be removed from the list of approved towing companies and shall be ineligible for participation in the rotation tow program for a period of six months. Any such person who has been found guilty of two such violations within the preceding twenty-four month period shall be removed from the list of approved towing companies and shall be ineligible for participation in the rotation tow program for a period of one year. h. The commissioner may promulgate such additional rules as he or she deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section. § 20-520 Removal of disabled vehicles on highways. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, where the authorization of the commissioner of transportation or the police commissioner is required to remove a disabled vehicle from any of the highways, parkways, expressways, drives, interstate routes, thruways and bridges set forth in the traffic regulations of the department of transportation, it shall be a violation of this section to effect such removal without such authorization. § 20-520.1 Acceptance of major credit cards as prerequisite to participation in city towing programs; violations. a. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. City towing program shall mean the directed accident response program established pursuant to section 20-518 of this subchapter, the special accident response districts established pursuant to section 20-518.1 of this subchapter, the rotation tow program established pursuant to section 20-519 of this subchapter, the removal of disabled vehicles on highways pursuant to authorization by the department of transportation or the police department, and any program whereby a city agency, pursuant to law, rule or agreement, directs a towing business to tow a vehicle without the prior consent of such vehicle's owner for any reason other than the towing of a vehicle in satisfaction of a judgment for an outstanding debt to the city. 2. Major credit card shall mean MasterCard, Visa, American Express, or Discover. b. No towing business shall participate in any city towing program, unless such towing business shall: (i) satisfactorily demonstrate to the agency administering such program or authorizing such participation, that such business accepts at least two major credit cards for towing in accordance with generally accepted business practices; (ii) notify such agency in writing of the major credit cards accepted and any changes in the major credit cards such towing business accepts; and (iii) display decals identifying the major credit cards accepted on all tow trucks used to tow vehicles in the city towing program in a manner to be prescribed by the commissioner. c. Any person participating in a city towing program who shall: (i) fail to accept at least two major credit cards; or (ii) refuse to accept a credit card which such person has informed the administering agency is accepted pursuant to subdivision b of this section, shall, after notice and opportunity to be heard, be liable for a penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500). Any such person who has been found guilty of three such violations within the preceding twenty-four month period shall be removed from participation in such program for a period of time to be determined by the commissioner or administering agency but not to exceed one year; provided, however that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any contract entered into between a towing business and a city agency prior to the date of adoption by the city council of the local law which added this section. § 20-521 Interagency advisory council. Repealed. § 20-522 Penalties. The penalties imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other sanctions and orders which may be imposed by the commissioner pursuant to this chapter including but not limited to such sanctions and orders which may be imposed pursuant to section 20-105 of this code. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions a and b of section 20-106 of this code, the following penalties shall apply for violations of this subchapter: a. 1. Any person who violates the provisions of sections 20-496, 20-509, 20-515, paragraph two of subdivision b of section 20-518 or section 20-527 of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars or more than three thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 2. Any person who violates the provisions of sections 20-496, 20-509, 20-515, paragraph two of subdivision b of section 20-518 or section 20-527 of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder who has been found guilty of a violation of any of such sections or such rules two times within the preceding twenty-four month period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars or more than ten thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 3. A person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any of the rules promulgated thereunder and is not subject to the penalties imposed pursuant to paragraphs one or two of this subdivision shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars or more than two thousand five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. For every subsequent violation of the same provision of this subchapter by the same licensee within a twenty-four month period, the fine shall increase between one hundred and five hundred dollars per violation. 4. Except as otherwise specifically provided in paragraphs one or two of this subdivision, there shall be no criminal penalties pursuant to this subdivision for a violation of the provisions of sections 20-518 and 20-519 of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder. b. 1. In addition to the penalties prescribed by paragraph one of subdivision a of this section, any person who violates the provisions of sections 20-496, 20-509, 20-515, paragraph two of subdivision b of section 20-518 or section 20-527 of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars or more than three thousand dollars. 2. In addition to the penalties prescribed by paragraph two of subdivision a of this section, any person who violates the provisions of sections 20-496, 20-509, 20-515, paragraph two of subdivision b of section 20-518 or section 20-527 of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder who has been found guilty of a violation of any such sections or such rules two times within the preceding twenty-four month period shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than one thousand dollars nor more than ten thousand dollars. 3. In addition to the penalties prescribed by paragraph three of subdivision a of this section, any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder, other than sections 20-496, 20-509, 20-515, paragraph two of subdivision b of section 20-518 or section 20-257 of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder, shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than two hundred fifty dollars or more than two thousand five hundred dollars. For every subsequent violation of the same provision of this subchapter by the same licensee within a twenty-four month period, the fine shall increase between one hundred and five hundred dollars per violation. § 20-522.1 Violations for operating without a license; seizure; forfeiture. a. 1. For purposes of this section, the term owner shall mean an owner as defined in section one hundred twenty-eight and in subdivision three of section three hundred eighty-eight of the vehicle and traffic law. 2. For purposes of this section, the term security interest shall mean a security interest as defined in subdivision k of section two thousand one hundred one of the vehicle and traffic law. b. Any police officer or authorized officer or employee of the department, upon service upon the owner or operator of a tow truck of a notice of violation for engaging in any activity for which a license is required pursuant to subdivision a of section 20-496 of this subchapter without such license, may seize a tow truck which such police officer or authorized officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe is being used in connection with such a violation. Any vehicle seized pursuant to this subdivision shall be delivered into the custody of the department or other appropriate agency. The commissioner shall hold a hearing to adjudicate the violation underlying the seizure within five business days after the date of seizure and shall render his or her determination within three business days after the conclusion of the hearing. c. An owner shall be eligible to obtain release of a vehicle seized pursuant to subdivision b of this section prior to the hearing provided for in such subdivision, where such owner has not previously been found liable for a violation for engaging in any activity for which a license is required pursuant to subdivision a of section 20-496 of this subchapter without such license, which violation was committed within a five-year period prior to the violation resulting in seizure. The vehicle shall be released to an eligible owner upon the posting of an all cash bond in a form satisfactory to the commissioner in an amount sufficient to cover the maximum fines or civil penalties which may be imposed for the violation underlying the seizure and all reasonable costs for removal and storage of such vehicle. d. Where the commissioner, after adjudication of the violation underlying the seizure, finds that the vehicle has not been used in connection with engaging in any activity for which a license is required pursuant to subdivision a of section 20-496 of this subchapter without such license, the department shall promptly release such vehicle upon written demand of its owner. e. Where the commissioner, after adjudication of the violation underlying the seizure, finds that the vehicle has been used in connection with engaging in any activity for which a license is required pursuant to subdivision a of section 20-496 of this subchapter without such license, then: (i) if the vehicle is not subject to forfeiture pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision g of this section, the department shall release such vehicle to an owner upon payment of all applicable fines and civil penalties and all reasonable costs of removal and storage; or (ii) if the vehicle is subject to forfeiture pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision g of this section, the department may release such vehicle to an owner upon payment of all applicable fines and civil penalties and all reasonable costs of removal and storage, or may commence a forfeiture action within ten days after the owner's written demand for such vehicle. f. Any vehicle that has not been claimed by the owner within ten days after adjudication by the commissioner of the violation underlying the seizure shall be deemed by the department to be abandoned. Such vehicle shall be disposed of by the department pursuant to section twelve hundred twenty-four of the vehicle and traffic law. g. 1. In addition to any other fine, penalty or sanction provided for in section 20-522 of this code, a vehicle seized pursuant to subdivision b of this section, and all rights, title and interest therein shall be subject to forfeiture to the city upon notice and judicial determination thereof if the owner of such vehicle has been found liable at least two times for using a vehicle in connection with engaging in any activity for which a license is required pursuant to subdivision a of section 20-496 of this subchapter without such license, both of which violations were committed within a five-year period. 2. A forfeiture action which is commenced pursuant to this subdivision shall be commenced by the filing of a summons with notice or a summons and complaint in accordance with the civil practice law and rules. Such summons with notice or a summons and complaint shall be served in accordance with the civil practice law and rules on all owners of the subject vehicle listed in the records maintained by the department of motor vehicles, or for vehicles not registered in New York state, in the records maintained by the state of registration. A vehicle which is the subject of such action shall remain in the custody of the department or other appropriate agency pending the final determination of the forfeiture action. 3. Notice of the institution of the forfeiture action shall be given by first class mail to all persons holding a security interest in such vehicle which security interest has been filed with the department of motor vehicles pursuant to the provisions of title ten of the vehicle and traffic law, at the address set forth in the records of such department, or for vehicles not registered in New York state, all persons who hold a security interest in such vehicle which security interest has been filed with such state of registration and which persons are made known by such state to the department, at the address provided by such state of registration. 4. Any owner who receives notice of the institution of a forfeiture action who claims an interest in the vehicle subject to forfeiture may assert a claim in such action for the recovery of the vehicle or satisfaction of the owner's interest in such vehicle. Any person with a security interest in such vehicle who receives notice of the institution of the forfeiture action who claims an interest in such vehicle subject to forfeiture may assert a claim in such action for satisfaction of such person's security interest in such vehicle. 5. Forfeiture pursuant to this subdivision shall be made subject to the interest of a person who claims an interest in the vehicle pursuant to paragraph four of this subdivision, where such person establishes that: (i) the use of the vehicle for the conduct that was the basis for seizure of the vehicle occurred without the knowledge of such person, or if such person had knowledge of such use, that such person did not consent to such use by doing all that could reasonably have been done to prevent such use, and that such person did not knowingly obtain such interest in the vehicle in order to avoid the forfeiture of such vehicle; or (ii) that the conduct that was the basis for such seizure was committed by any person other than such person claiming an interest in the vehicle, while such vehicle was unlawfully in the possession of a person who acquired possession thereof in violation of the criminal laws of the United States or any state. 6. The department or agency having custody of the vehicle, after judicial determination of forfeiture, shall, at its discretion, either: (i) retain such vehicle for the official use of the city or; (ii) by public notice of at least five days, sell such forfeited vehicle at public sale. The net proceeds of any such sale shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 7. In any forfeiture action commenced pursuant to this subdivision, where the court awards a sum of money to one or more persons in satisfaction of such person or persons' interest in the forfeited vehicle, the total amount awarded to satisfy such interest or interests shall not exceed the amount of the net proceeds of the sale of the forfeited vehicle after deduction of the lawful expenses incurred by the city, including the reasonable costs of removal and storage of the vehicle between the time of seizure and the date of sale. § 20-523 Enforcement. Authorized officers and employees of the department and of the police department shall have the power to enforce any provision of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder. § 20-524 Applicability of subchapter. a. 1. The commissioner shall grant an exemption from the provisions of this subchapter, other than section 20-520 of this subchapter, to the following persons for the operation of one or more tow trucks that are owned or operated by such person and are used exclusively in the business of such person: (a) a vehicle dismantler, salvage pool, mobile car crusher, or itinerant vehicle collector registered pursuant to section four hundred fifteen-a of the vehicle and traffic law, a scrap processor licensed under article six-C of the general business law and certified by the commissioner of motor vehicles of the state of New York as a scrap processor, and a scrap collector certified by the commissioner of motor vehicles of the state of New York as a scrap collector who complies with all licensing or permitting requirements applicable to such business; (b) a franchised public transportation operator; (c) a common carrier of passengers by motor vehicle, a common carrier of property by motor vehicle, a contract carrier of passengers by motor vehicle, and a contract carrier of property by motor vehicle as such terms are defined in subdivisions seven, eight, nine and ten, respectively, of section two of the transportation law when such common carriers possess such appropriate operating authority as is required by applicable law; (d) a public utility company or a public utility corporation as such terms are defined in subdivisions twenty-three and twenty-four, respectively, of section two of the public service law; (e) an owner of a vehicle licensed pursuant to chapter five of title nineteen of the code; (f) an operator of a school bus as such term is defined in section one hundred forty-two of the vehicle and traffic law; and (g) a motor-vehicle rental agency. 2. An application for such exemption shall be made to the commissioner in the form and manner prescribed by rule of the commissioner. The commissioner may impose a reasonable application fee to cover the administrative costs of granting an exemption. A certificate of exemption shall be issued for each tow truck utilized by such person as described above and shall be displayed in the manner prescribed by rule of the commissioner. No certificate issued pursuant to this subdivision shall be assignable or transferable or used for any tow truck other than the tow truck for which it was issued. b. The licensing requirements of subdivision b of section 20-496 of this subchapter shall not be applicable to an individual employed by a person who has been granted a certificate of exemption pursuant to subdivision a of this section when such individual is driving or otherwise operating a tow truck, or assisting in any activity for which a license is required under this subchapter, and a certificate of exemption has been issued for the tow truck utilized by such individual. c. This subchapter shall not be applicable to a governmental agency or to any person who performs towing and storage services exclusively on the premises of any facility operated by the port authority of New York and New Jersey, or to an individual employed by either such entity when driving or otherwise operating a tow truck or assisting in any activity for which a license is required under this subchapter in the course of his or her employment. d. The commissioner may by rule exempt from the provisions of section 20-509 and 20-514 the towing of certain classes of vehicles based on their dimension, weight, or dimension and weight. e. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision c of this section, the provisions of section 20-528 of this subchapter shall be applicable to all city marshals and city agencies. § 20-525 Regulations. The commissioner may promulgate such rules and regulations as he or she deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter. § 20-526 Tow advisory board. Repealed. § 20-527 Credit cards to be accepted in payment. Any person licensed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall accept payment in person by credit card for any fees incurred in accordance with generally accepted business practices. § 20-528 Police precinct notification. a. Within two hours subsequent to the towing of any motor vehicle pursuant to any provision of this code, any rules promulgated pursuant thereto or any rules promulgated by the department of transportation pursuant to any other provision of law, the tow truck operator or his or her designee shall notify the local police precinct either in person or by electronic submission that the vehicle was towed. Such information shall be made available, upon request, to the owner of the vehicle or to any person authorized by the owner to have possession of the vehicle. Such list shall include the make and model of the vehicle, its license plate number, the reason why the vehicle was towed and the location and hours during which the vehicle may be retrieved. b. The provisions of subdivision a shall not apply where such towing is conducted in the physical presence of or with the consent of a person in charge of the vehicle or where, within two hours of such towing, information relating to such towing is entered by or on behalf of a governmental official or agency into the New York statewide police information network. § 20-529 Reporting on industry compliance. Beginning on November 15, 2011 and annually on that date thereafter, the department shall submit a report to the council concerning violations issued to tow truck licensees. Such annual report shall contain data from the preceding twelve months that includes but is not limited to: (a) the total number of violations issued, disaggregated by section of the administrative code violated; (b) the total number of violations issued to each licensee; (c) the number of license suspensions, disaggregated by licensee; and (d) the number of license revocations, disaggregated by licensee. Subchapter 32: Booting of Motor Vehicles § 20-531 License required; definitions. a. 1. No person shall engage in booting without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this subchapter. 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph one of this subdivision, an individual shall not require a license issued pursuant to this subchapter where such individual is an employee of and is authorized or directed to engage in booting by a person required to be licensed by this subchapter. b. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Boot or booting shall mean the act of placing on a parked motor vehicle a mechanical device that is designed to be attached to the wheel or tire or other part of such vehicle so as to prohibit its usual manner of movement; 2. Person shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, association, firm or other business entity; and 3. Private parking lot shall mean any area of private property near or contiguous to premises having one or more stores or business establishments which is used for the parking of motor vehicles of customers or patrons or any one who frequents such stores and business establishments, but shall be limited to such areas as are provided to the public without charge. c. No licensee shall boot, permit or authorize booting in violation of the provisions of this subchapter or section 19-169.2 of this code or any rule promulgated pursuant to this subchapter or section 19-169.2 of this code. d. A licensee shall be liable for any violation by such licensee's employees or agents of this subchapter, section 19-169.2 of this code or any rule promulgated pursuant to this subchapter or section 19-169.2 of this code. § 20-532 Application; fingerprinting; fee; term. a. An application for any license required under this subchapter or for any renewal thereof shall be made to the commissioner in such form and manner as the commissioner shall prescribe by rule. An applicant for any such license shall be fingerprinted by the department for the purpose of securing criminal history records from the state division of criminal justice services and shall pay a processing fee as required by the state division of criminal justice services. Where the applicant is a sole proprietorship, fingerprints shall be taken of the owner thereof; where the applicant is a partnership, fingerprints shall be taken of the general partners thereof; where the applicant is a corporation, association, firm or other business, fingerprints shall be taken of the officers, principals, directors, and stockholders of more than ten percent of the outstanding stock. Any person required to be fingerprinted hereunder shall furnish to the department three current passport size photographs of such persons. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the commissioner need not require applicants for licenses required under this subchapter to be fingerprinted if criminal history records concerning such applicants are not available from the state division of criminal justice services. b. There shall be a biennial fee for a license pursuant to this subchapter which shall be three hundred and forty dollars. c. All licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall expire on December thirty-first, in odd-numbered years, unless sooner suspended or revoked. d. The commissioner may refuse to issue any license required under this subchapter if such applicant or any employee or agent of such applicant has engaged in conduct which would constitute a basis for license suspension or revocation under this title. § 20-532.1 Bond required. As a condition of the issuance of a license to engage in booting, each applicant for such license or a renewal thereof shall furnish to the commissioner a surety bond in the sum of five thousand dollars, payable to the city of New York, executed by the applicant and a surety approved by the commissioner. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, section 19-169.2 of this code or subchapter one of chapter five of this title and any rules promulgated thereunder, and upon the further condition that the applicant will pay to the city any fine, penalty or other obligation relating to a violation of this subchapter, section 19-169.2 of this code or subchapter one of chapter five of this title and any rules promulgated thereunder, within thirty days of its imposition, or any final judgment recovered by any person whose motor vehicle was booted by the applicant and was damaged thereby. The commissioner may in his or her discretion, after a public hearing upon five days notice published in the City Record, increase the amount of the surety bond required by this section to an amount not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars. The commissioner may by rule authorize an applicant, in lieu of furnishing a bond, to satisfy the requirements of this section by depositing cash in an amount equal to the amount of the surety bond required by this section or by rule of the commissioner. § 20-533 Suspension, revocation and renewal of licenses. After due notice and opportunity to be heard, the commissioner may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any license required by this subchapter upon a determination that the licensee or any employee or agent of such licensee has violated any provision of this subchapter, section 19-169.2 of this code or any rule promulgated pursuant to this subchapter or section 19-169.2 of this code. § 20-534 Records. Every person licensed to engage in booting shall maintain books, records, ledgers, receipts, bills and such other written records as the commissioner may prescribe by rule. Such records shall be made available for inspection by the commissioner at his or her request at either the licensee's place of business or at the offices of the department. § 20-535 Charges and release of vehicles. a. The charge to release a motor vehicle that has been booted on a private parking lot shall be no more than twenty-five dollars. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, where a motor vehicle has been booted on a private parking lot and subsequently towed from such parking lot, no additional charge may be imposed for the towing of such vehicle. b. Any person who has booted a motor vehicle shall release such vehicle within thirty minutes of receiving a request for such vehicle's release; provided, however, that payment of any charge for booting is made at or prior to the time of such vehicle's release. c. The owner or person in control of a vehicle which has been booted by a licensee or such licensee's employee or agent shall be permitted to pay any charge for booting at the location where such vehicle was booted and the licensee, or other person authorized to accept payment, shall accept such payment, in person by credit card in accordance with generally accepted business practices. § 20-536 Enforcement and penalties. Authorized employees of the department, or the department of transportation, or any police officer, shall have the power to enforce any provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated pursuant thereto. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated pursuant thereto shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred nor more than one thousand dollars. § 20-537 Rules. The commissioner shall promulgate such rules as the commissioner deems necessary to effectuate the provisions of this subchapter. § 20-538 Applicability. The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the booting of a motor vehicle by: a. The city, any other governmental entity, or a person acting under the direction of the city or such governmental entity, when such booting is authorized by any other provision of law or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto; or b. Any person who has a lien pursuant to section 184 of the lien law and who detains such motor vehicle in his or her lawful possession. Subchapter 33: Car Washes § 20-539 Short title. This subchapter shall be known as and may be cited as the car wash accountability law. § 20-540 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter: Applicant. The term applicant means any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, joint venture, association or other business entity that seeks a license or renewal of a license to engage in the operation of a car wash. Car wash. The term car wash means any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, joint venture, association, or other business entity that engages in the cleaning of vehicles, including washing, detailing, drying, polishing, vacuuming or otherwise providing cosmetic care to vehicles. Car wash includes a mobile car wash. “Car wash” shall not include: 1. any business entity that is engaged in selling, leasing, renting or repairing motor vehicles, where car washing is ancillary to the primary business of such entity; 2. any self-service facility for washing vehicles, where the facility's employees do not provide assistance to customers in the cleaning of vehicles, such as washing, detailing, drying, polishing, vacuuming or otherwise providing cosmetic care to vehicles, including businesses such as convenience stores, gas stations and oil change facilities, where car washing is ancillary to the primary business of the facility; 3. any person that engages in the cleaning of vehicles on an intermittent basis to raise funds for a not-for-profit organization; or 4. any federal, state or local governmental agency. Collective bargaining representative. The term collective bargaining representative means a bona fide labor organization that is the recognized or certified exclusive bargaining representative of the employees of an employer under applicable law. The commissioner may request documentation as proof that the employer's employees have a collective bargaining representative. Licensee. The term licensee means any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, joint venture, association or other business entity that is currently licensed by the commissioner to engage in the operation of a car wash. § 20-541 License. Mobile car wash. The term “mobile car wash” means any individual or business entity that engages in the cleaning of vehicles, including washing, detailing, drying, polishing, vacuuming, or otherwise providing cosmetic care to vehicles at a place other than a fixed business address. a. It shall be unlawful for any car wash to operate without a license. b. All licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for two years. c. Each applicant applying for a car wash license or renewal thereof shall file an application in such form and detail as the commissioner shall prescribe and shall pay a fee of five hundred fifty dollars for each location where such applicant's car wash operates. d. In addition to an applicant's name, address, corporate structure and ownership, and other information as the commissioner may require, an applicant for a license required by this subchapter shall furnish the following information: 1. A signed statement certifying compliance with all applicable laws, regulations and rules including: i. that the applicant is in compliance with the New York city plumbing code section PC 1003 and any rules promulgated by the commissioner of buildings or the commissioner of environmental protection, regarding the applicant's oil/water separator system, sand interceptor, and/or backflow prevention devices, if any such equipment or devices are required for the operation of such car wash; ii. that the applicant is in compliance with section 24-334 of this code; iii. that the applicant has received any necessary permits from the department of health and mental hygiene to use non-potable ground water; and iv. that the applicant has complied with subdivision b of section 24-529 of this code; 2. Written proof of compliance with the surety bond requirement as described in section 20-542 of this subchapter; 3. Signed certification by the applicant that there are no outstanding final judgments or warrants against the applicant in any action arising out of a violation of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder; 4. Certificates of insurance for workers' compensation, unemployment insurance and disability insurance coverage; and 5. Original or true copies of liability insurance policies or certificates of insurance for liability insurance carried by the applicant. e. In addition to any of the powers that may be exercised by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter or chapter one of this title or any rules promulgated thereunder, the commissioner may deny issuance or renewal of a license upon a finding that: 1. the applicant has failed to satisfy any fine or civil penalty ordered against such applicant in a judicial or administrative proceeding arising out of a violation of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder; 2. an entity to which the applicant is a successor, as such term is described in section 20-543 of this subchapter, has failed to satisfy any fine or civil penalty ordered against such entity in a judicial or administrative proceeding arising out of a violation of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder; or 3. the applicant lacks good moral character. In making such determination, the commissioner may consider, but is not limited to, any of the following factors: i. failure by such applicant to provide truthful information or documentation in connection with the application or other request for information; ii. final determinations of liability in a civil, criminal or administrative action involving egregious or repeated nonpayment or underpayment of wages or other illegal acts or omissions bearing a direct relationship to the fitness of the applicant to conduct the business for which the license is sought; except that the commissioner shall take into account mitigating factors including (A) the passage of time since such findings of liability or other illegal acts or omissions at issue, (B) the severity of such findings of liability or other illegal acts or omissions, (C) whether any such findings or other illegal acts or omissions were resolved or are still pending, and (D) any change in circumstance that might reduce the likelihood of such findings or other illegal acts or omissions recurring during the period of licensure, including the fact that such findings or other illegal acts or omissions at issue took place prior to the effective date of this subchapter; iii. a prior revocation by the commissioner of a car wash license held by the applicant or licensee; or iv. a finding that within the last ten years an entity to which the applicant is a successor, as such term is described in section 20-543 of this subchapter, has been denied the issuance or renewal of a license pursuant to this subdivision or has had a license revoked pursuant to section 20-545 of this subchapter. § 20-542 Surety bonds. a. Except as provided in subdivision b of this section, prior to the issuance or renewal of a car wash license, each applicant shall furnish to the commissioner a surety bond in the sum of one hundred fifty thousand dollars, payable to the city of New York and approved as to form by the commissioner. b. Prior to the issuance or renewal of a car wash license, an applicant described in paragraph one or two of this subdivision shall furnish to the commissioner a surety bond in the sum of thirty thousand dollars, payable to the city of New York and approved as to form by the commissioner. 1. The applicant is a party to a current and bona fide collective bargaining agreement, with a collective bargaining representative of its employees, that expressly provides for the timely payment of wages and an expeditious process to resolve disputes concerning nonpayment or underpayment of wages. 2. The applicant is covered by an active monitoring agreement pursuant to a settlement supervised by the office of the attorney general of the United States or the state of New York, or the department of labor of the United States or the state of New York, or other government agency with jurisdiction over wage payment issues, on the condition that such monitoring agreement: i. expressly provides for the timely payment of wages at or above the applicable minimum wage rate; ii. requires that the employer be subjected to at least monthly monitoring by an independent monitor appointed; and iii. provides for an expeditious process to resolve disputes concerning wage violations without the expense of litigation, including reasonable mechanisms to secure the assets necessary to cover any judgment or arbitration award. c. The surety bond required by subdivisions a and b of this section shall be conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder, and upon the further condition that the applicant shall pay or satisfy: 1. any fine, penalty or other obligation to the city within thirty days of the imposition of such fine, penalty or obligation; 2. any final judgment recovered by any person who received car wash services from a licensee thereunder and was damaged thereby within thirty days of such judgment; and 3. any final judgment recovered by any employee of the licensee for nonpayment or underpayment of wages within thirty days of such judgment. § 20-543 Successor. An applicant shall be considered a successor to a predecessor car wash upon a finding that such applicant satisfies two or more of the following criteria: 1. the applicant uses the same facility, facilities or workforce to offer substantially the same services as the predecessor car wash; 2. the applicant shared in the ownership, or otherwise exercised control over, the management of the predecessor car wash; 3. the applicant employs in a managerial capacity any person who controlled the wages, hours, or working conditions of the affected employees of the predecessor car wash; or 4. the applicant is an immediate family member, including a parent, step-parent, child, or step, foster or adopted child, of any owner, partner, officer, or director of the predecessor car wash, or of any person who had a financial interest in the predecessor car wash. § 20-544 Records. Each licensee under this subchapter shall maintain a log documenting complaints of damage to vehicles in an electronic format to be designated by the commissioner. Each such log entry shall include a detailed description of such damage, and the amount of compensation, if any, that the customer received for such damage. Such records shall be kept for a period of at least three years and shall be made available to the department upon request. Each such licensee shall also maintain the records described in subdivision b of section 24-529 of this code for at least three years and shall make such records available to the department and the department of environmental protection upon request. § 20-545 Enforcement. a. In addition to any of the powers that may be exercised by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter or chapter one of this title or any rules promulgated thereunder, the commissioner, after due notice and an opportunity to be heard, may suspend or revoke a license issued pursuant to section 20-541 of this subchapter upon the occurrence of any one or more of the following conditions: 1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the application for the license; 2. A final determination of liability concerning a violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter; 3. A final determination of liability in a civil, criminal or administrative action involving egregious or repeated nonpayment or underpayment of wages or other illegal acts or omissions bearing a direct relationship to the fitness of the applicant to conduct the business for which the license is sought; except that the commissioner shall take into account mitigating factors including (A) the passage of time since such findings of liability or other illegal acts or omissions at issue, (B) the severity of such findings of liability or other illegal acts or omissions, (C) whether any such findings or other illegal acts or omissions were resolved or are still pending, and (D) any change in circumstance that might reduce the likelihood of such findings or other illegal acts or omissions recurring during the period of licensure, including the fact that such findings or other illegal acts or omissions at issue took place prior to the effective date of this subchapter; 4. Failure to answer a summons, notice of violation or subpoena, appear for a hearing, or satisfy a fine or civil penalty ordered against such entity in a judicial or administrative proceeding arising out of a violation of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder; or 5. Failure to submit records described in section 20-544 for inspection by the department. b. 1. Any individual or business entity operating a car wash without a valid license issued by the commissioner shall be liable for a civil penalty recoverable in a proceeding before the office of administrative trials and hearings pursuant to section 1048 of the charter. Such penalties shall be in the amount of $100 per day for every calendar day during which the unlicensed car wash operated. 2. Any individual or business entity operating a mobile car wash without a valid license issued by the commissioner shall be liable for a civil penalty recoverable in a proceeding before the office of administrative trials and hearings pursuant to section 1048 of the charter. Such penalties shall be in the amount of $100 per day for every calendar day during which the unlicensed mobile car wash operated. Any authorized officer or employee of the department of sanitation shall have the power to enforce this paragraph or any rule promulgated pursuant to this paragraph. c. An applicant who knowingly submits false information to the commissioner as part of an application for a license pursuant to section 20-541 of this subchapter or in response to any other request for information shall be liable for a civil penalty of up to one thousand dollars in addition to any other civil or criminal penalties that may be applicable under this code or any other law, rule or regulation. d.* Notwithstanding any other section of this title, a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of section 20-544 of this subchapter or any rule promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes other than being the basis for the suspension or revocation of a license pursuant to subdivision a of this section. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-544 of this subchapter or any rule promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department’s administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. d.* In addition to any other penalty imposed by any other provision of law or rule promulgated thereunder, whenever any owner or operator of a mobile car wash has engaged in any acts or practices that constitute a violation of subdivision 4 or 6 of section 16-118 or paragraph 1 of subdivision b of section 15-205 and any authorized officer or employee of the department of sanitation has served upon such owner or operator a notice of violation of such subdivision or such paragraph, such officer or employee may remove, tow, or seize any vehicle or equipment used to operate such mobile car wash. Any vehicle or equipment seized pursuant to this subdivision shall be delivered into the custody of the department of sanitation or other appropriate agency. * Editor's note: there are two subsections designated as d. 1. The office of administrative trials and hearings shall hold a hearing to adjudicate the violation of subdivision 4 or 6 of section 16-118 or paragraph 1 of subdivision b of section 15-205 upon the request of such owner or operator within 2 business days after such request, and shall render a determination within 2 business days after the conclusion of the hearing. 2. Where the office of administrative trials and hearings conducts an adjudication as required by paragraph 1 of this subdivision, and finds that such violation has not occurred, the agency having custody of the vehicle or equipment used to operate such mobile car wash shall, upon written demand of the owner of such vehicle or equipment, promptly release such vehicle or equipment to such owner. e. Where the office of administrative trials and hearings conducts an adjudication as required by paragraph 1 of subdivision d of this section, and finds that such violation has occurred, the agency having custody of the vehicle or equipment seized shall proceed as follows: 1. if the vehicle or equipment is not subject to forfeiture pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision g of this section, the agency shall release such vehicle or equipment to the owner of such vehicle or equipment upon payment of all applicable civil penalties and all reasonable costs of removal and storage; or 2. if the vehicle or equipment are subject to forfeiture pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision g of this section, the agency having custody of the vehicle or equipment seized may release such vehicle or equipment to the owner of such mobile car wash upon payment of all civil penalties and all reasonable costs of removal and storage, or may commence a forfeiture action within 10 days after the written demand by such owner for such vehicle or equipment. f. The department of sanitation shall establish by rule the time within which vehicle or equipment that are not redeemed may be deemed abandoned and the procedures for disposal. g. 1. In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided for in this section, any vehicle or equipment seized pursuant to subdivision d of this section, and all rights, title, and interest therein shall be subject to forfeiture to the city upon notice and judicial determination thereof if the owner of such vehicle or equipment has been found liable at least 2 times within a 3 year period for having violated subdivision 4 or 6 of section 16-118 or paragraph 1 of subdivision b of section 15-205. 2. A forfeiture action pursuant to this subdivision shall be commenced by the filing of a summons with a notice or a summons and complaint in accordance with the civil practice law and rules. Such summons with notice or a summons and complaint shall be served in accordance with the civil practice law and rules on the individual or business entity that owns such vehicle or equipment used to operate such mobile car wash, and on any person listed on an application or other record of the department of consumer and worker protection as an owner of such mobile car wash. Vehicle or equipment which are the subject of such action shall remain in the custody of the department of sanitation or other appropriate agency pending the final determination of the forfeiture action. 3. Any person who receives notice of the institution of a forfeiture action who claims an interest in the vehicle or equipment subject to forfeiture may assert a claim in such action for the recovery of the vehicle or equipment or satisfaction of such owner’s interest in such vehicle or equipment. 4. Forfeiture pursuant to this subdivision shall be made subject to the interest of a person who claims an interest in such vehicle or equipment pursuant to paragraph 3 of this subdivision, where such person establishes that: (i) such mobile car wash was operated in violation of subdivision 4 or 6 of section 16-118 or paragraph 1 of subdivision b of section 15-205 without the knowledge of such person, or if such person had knowledge of such operation, that such person did not consent to such operation by doing all that could reasonably have been done to prevent such operation; or (ii) that the operation of such mobile car wash in violation of subdivision 4 or 6 of section 16-118 or paragraph 1 of subdivision b of section 15-205 was conducted by any person other than such person claiming an interest in the vehicle or equipment used to operate such mobile car wash, while such vehicle or equipment was unlawfully in the possession of a person who acquired possession thereof in violation of the criminal laws of the United States or any state. 5. The department of sanitation or other agency having custody of the vehicle or equipment, after judicial determination of forfeiture, shall, by public notice of at least 5 days, sell such forfeited vehicle or equipment at public sale. The net proceeds of any such sale shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 6. In any forfeiture action commenced pursuant to this subdivision, where the court awards a sum of money to 1 or more persons in satisfaction of such person’s interest in the forfeited vehicle or equipment, the total amount awarded to satisfy such interest or interests shall not exceed the amount of the net proceeds of the sale of the forfeited vehicle or equipment after deduction of the lawful expenses incurred by the city, including reasonable costs of removal and storage of the vehicle or equipment between the time of the seizure and the date of sale. § 20-546 Rules. The commissioner may make and promulgate such rules as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter. Subchapter 34: Ticket Sellers § 20-550 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Guide. The term guide has the same meaning as in section 20-242 of the code. Mode of transportation. The term mode of transportation means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, highway, body of water, or through the air, including motorized and non-motorized devices. Place of entertainment. The term place of entertainment means any privately or publicly owned and operated entertainment facility, such as a theater, stadium, arena, racetrack, museum, amusement park, observatory, or other place where attractions, performances, concerts, exhibits, athletic games, or contests are held for which an entry fee is charged. Public space. The term public space means all publicly owned property between the property lines on a street as such property lines are shown on the City Record, including, but not limited to, a park, plaza, pedestrian plaza, roadway, shoulder, tree space, sidewalk, or parking space between such property lines. It shall also include, but not be limited to, publicly owned or leased land, buildings, piers, wharfs, stadiums, and terminals. Guided tour. The term guided tour means any event during which a person acts as a guide. Ticket. The term ticket means any evidence of, or anything purported to be evidence of, the right to enter or participate in any place of entertainment, mode of transportation, or guided tour. Ticket seller. The term ticket seller means a person who: (1) vends tickets in a public space, unless such person is vending tickets on behalf of a mode of transportation operating pursuant to a contract with the city of New York or an entity authorized to act on the city of New York's behalf; or (2) sells, gives, or otherwise transfers, for vending in a public space, any ticket to another person, unless such person is a place of entertainment, mode of transportation, or guided tour. Ticket seller license. The term ticket seller license means a license issued by the commissioner to a ticket seller. Vend. The term vend means to hawk, peddle, sell, lease, offer to sell or lease, at retail, tickets. Vend in an aggressive manner. The term vend in an aggressive manner means: (1) approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during, or after vending, if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to (i) fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of property, or the commission of any offense as defined in section ten of the penal law upon oneself or another; (ii) otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value; or (iii) suffer unreasonable inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm; (2) intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person, or an occupied vehicle without such person's or vehicle occupant's consent in the course of vending, or intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person in the company of the person being vended to without such person's consent in the course of vending; (3) intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle in the course of vending by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; or (4) using violent or threatening gestures in the course of vending. § 20-551 Ticket seller licenses. a. 1. It shall be unlawful for any person required to be licensed pursuant to this subchapter to act as a ticket seller without having first obtained a ticket seller license in accordance with this subchapter. 2. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, give, or otherwise transfer, for vending in a public space, any tickets, to an unlicensed ticket seller. b. All ticket seller licenses shall be valid for no more than one year and expire on July 31 each year unless suspended or revoked. The annual fee for such license or renewal thereof shall be $45 or shall be a portion of $45 prorated to the effective period of the license, and shall be paid unless the applicant is exempted by article four of the general business law. c. 1. Each person applying for a ticket seller license or renewal thereof shall file an application in such form and detail as the commissioner may prescribe and shall pay the fee required by this subchapter. 2. An application for a ticket seller license shall include, but need not be limited to, the following information: (i) the name of the applicant and at least one piece of current valid photo identification issued by a government agency of any jurisdiction that may be used to establish proof of identity; (ii) the name and address of each person on whose behalf the applicant vends, or intends to vend, or if the applicant is not vending on behalf of another person, the home address of the applicant; (iii) one print of a full-face photograph of the applicant taken not more than 30 days prior to the date of the application; and (iv) if an applicant is a non-resident of the city, the name and address of a registered agent within the city or designation of the commissioner as their agent upon whom process or other notification may be served. d. Upon the approval of an application, the commissioner shall issue a ticket seller license to the applicant. Such licenses shall not be transferrable. e. A ticket seller license shall contain the licensee's name, license number, and a non-removable photograph of the licensee. f. Whenever any information provided on the application for a ticket seller license or renewal thereof has changed, such licensee shall notify the commissioner within 10 days of such change. g. The commissioner may promulgate rules exempting any non-profit association including, but not limited to, a government agency, charitable, educational, religious, or other such organization from compliance with this subchapter. § 20-552 Denial of license or renewal. a. In addition to any of the powers that may be exercised by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter or chapter one of this title, or any rules promulgated pursuant to such subchapter or chapter, the commissioner may refuse to issue or renew a ticket seller license: 1. if an applicant has pending any unanswered summons, unsatisfied fines, or penalties for violation of this subchapter or chapter one of this title, or any rules promulgated pursuant to such subchapter or chapter; or 2. for any cause set forth in chapter one of this title or elsewhere in this subchapter as a ground for suspension, or revocation, or non-renewal. b. Notwithstanding subdivision a of this section, the commissioner shall refuse to renew a ticket seller license if the commissioner becomes aware of any of the following: 1. an applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor pursuant to subdivision a of section 20-556; 2. an applicant has failed to answer a summons or notice of violation, appear for a civil or criminal summons, or pay a fine or civil penalty imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter or chapter one of this title, or any rules promulgated pursuant to such subchapter or chapter, two or more times within any one year period; or 3. an applicant has been convicted of a crime while acting as a ticket seller. § 20-553 Hearings. Unless otherwise specifically provided, notice and hearings upon the denial, suspension, or revocation of a ticket seller license or the imposition of penalties provided in this subchapter shall be in accordance with chapter one of this title and any rules promulgated pursuant to such chapter. § 20-554 Display of license and required apparel. a. Each ticket seller shall wear their ticket seller license conspicuously at all times while engaged in vending and shall exhibit such license upon demand to any police officer, peace officer, or other authorized officer or employee of the department or other city agency. b. In any civil or criminal action or proceeding for any violation of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to such subchapter, failure by a ticket seller required to be licensed pursuant to this subchapter to exhibit upon demand a ticket seller license in accordance with this subchapter to any police officer, peace officer, or other authorized officer or employee of the department or other city agency shall be presumptive evidence that such person is not duly licensed. c. Each ticket seller shall wear a jacket, vest, or other wearing apparel on the upper part of their body as the outermost garment at all times while engaged in vending. Such apparel shall indicate that the ticket seller is licensed under this subchapter; the ticket seller's license number; and, if the ticket seller is employed by or vends on behalf of a place of entertainment, mode of transportation, or guided tour, the name of such place of entertainment, mode of transportation, or guided tour. Such information shall be in lettering and numerals at least one inch in height so as to be plainly readable at a distance of at least ten feet. § 20-555 Duties of ticket sellers. a. Each ticket seller shall keep such written records as the commissioner may prescribe by rule and shall make such records available for inspection by an authorized officer or employee of any city agency. b. Each ticket seller shall permit inspections by the department or any authorized city agency of any tickets intended for vending in a public space by such licensee and shall provide information regarding such tickets, including the address and name of each person whose tickets are being vended. § 20-556 Restrictions on ticket sellers. a. No ticket seller shall vend in an aggressive manner. b. No ticket seller shall vend within any bus stop, except that a ticket seller employed by or authorized to act on behalf of a mode of transportation or guided tour may vend such person's tickets at a bus stop designated for the use of such mode of transportation or, guided tour by the commissioner of the department of transportation where such bus stop is not within a geographical area under the control of the department of parks and recreation, unless written authorization therefor has been obtained from the commissioner of the department of parks and recreation pursuant to subdivision g of this section. c. No ticket seller shall vend within any taxi stand, within the portion of the sidewalk abutting any no standing zone adjacent to a hospital as defined in subdivision one of section 2801 of the public health law, within 10 feet of any driveway, within 20 feet of subway entrance or exit, or within 10 feet of any corner. For purposes of this subdivision, 10 feet from any corner shall be measured from a point where the property line on the nearest intersecting block face, when extended, meets the curb. d. No ticket seller shall vend in the bed of a road and in no case shall such licensee vend so as to restrict the continued maintenance of a clear passageway for pedestrians or vehicles. e. A ticket seller may vend in a pedestrian plaza pursuant to rules of the department of transportation. f. No ticket seller shall vend on the median strip of a divided roadway unless such strip is intended for use as a pedestrian mall. g. No ticket seller shall vend within the geographical areas under the jurisdiction or control of the department of parks and recreation unless written authorization therefor has been obtained from the commissioner of parks and recreation. h. No ticket seller shall vend on any street which is in the area including and bounded on the east by the easterly side of Broadway, on the south by the southerly side of Liberty Street, on the west by the westerly side of West Street, and on the north by the northerly side of Vesey Street, except as otherwise authorized pursuant to this section. i. Where exigent circumstances exist and a police officer or other authorized officer, or employee of any city agency, gives notice to a ticket seller to temporarily move from any location such ticket seller shall not vend from such location. For purposes of this subdivision, exigent circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, unusually heavy pedestrian or vehicular traffic; the existence of any obstructions in the public space; an accident, fire, or other emergency situation; a parade; demonstration; or other such event or occurrence at or near such location. j. No ticket seller shall use equipment, stands, vehicles, racks, or displays in connection with vending in a public space except: (1) as necessary to accommodate a disability, as that term is defined in section 8-102; or (2) equipment that is at all times carried on the person of the ticket seller. k. No ticket seller shall make fraudulent, misrepresentative, or false statements in connection with vending. § 20-557 Suspension and revocation of license. a. Any ticket seller license may be suspended or revoked upon notice and an opportunity to be heard for any of the following causes: 1. fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements contained in the application for such license or any renewal application; 2. fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made in connection with the vending of tickets; 3. violation of chapter one or subchapter one of chapter five of this title, or any rules promulgated pursuant to such chapter or subchapter; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between such chapter and subchapter and this subchapter, this subchapter shall prevail; 4. four or more violations of any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to such subchapter that are issued on different calendar days and within a two-year period. b. Notwithstanding subdivision a of this section, the commissioner shall revoke a ticket seller license if the commissioner becomes aware of any of the following: 1. a licensee has been convicted of a misdemeanor pursuant to subdivision a of section 20-566* of this subchapter; * Editor's note: so in 2. a licensee has failed to answer a summons or notice of violation, appear for a civil or criminal summons, or pay a fine or civil penalty imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter or chapter one of this title, or any rules promulgated pursuant to such subchapter or chapter, two or more times within a one year period; or 3. a licensee has been convicted of a crime while acting as a ticket seller. c. Notwithstanding subdivisions a and b of this section, upon the occurrence of any of the conditions set forth in subdivision a or b of this section, if the commissioner determines that the continued possession by the ticket seller of a ticket seller license would pose an exigent danger to the public, the commissioner may immediately suspend such ticket seller license, subject to a prompt post-suspension hearing. § 20-558 Enforcement and rules. a. Authorized officers and employees of the department, and any department designated by the commissioner, as well as any police or peace officer, shall have the power to enforce any provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated pursuant to this subchapter. This provision shall in no way restrict any other power granted by law to an officer or employee of any city agency. b. Any police officer may seize from an unlicensed ticket seller tickets to be vended and devices used to vend by an unlicensed ticket seller. § 20-559 Penalties. a. Any person who violates, or causes another person to violate, any provision of subdivision a of section 20-551 or subdivision a of section 20-556, or any rules promulgated pursuant to such subdivisions, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. b. Except as provided in subdivision a of this section, any person who violates, or causes another person to violate, a provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated pursuant to such subchapter, shall be guilty of an offense punishable as follows: 1. for the first violation, a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50; 2. for the second violation issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100; 3. for the third violation within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $250; and 4. for the fourth and any subsequent violations within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a fine of not more than $500. c. In addition to the fines set forth in subdivisions a and b of this section, any person who violates, or causes another person to violate, any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to such subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty as follows: 1. for the first violation, a civil penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $50; 2. for the second violation issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a civil penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $100; 3. for the third violation within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a civil penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $250; and 4. for the fourth and any subsequent violations within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a civil penalty of not more than $500. d. For the purposes of this subchapter, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that any violation of any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to such subchapter by a ticket seller was caused by: 1. the place of entertainment, mode of transportation, or guided tour whose ticket is vended; and/or 2. the person on whose behalf the ticket is vended. Such presumption shall not apply: (i) where the ticket vended is counterfeit and was not issued by the place of entertainment, mode of transportation, or guided tour; or (ii) where the circumstances of the vending were not authorized or subject to the control of the place of entertainment, mode of transportation, or guided tour. e. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty pursuant to this section shall be commenced by the service of a summons or notice of violation which shall be returnable to the office of administrative trials and hearings. Subchapter 35: Electronic Cigarette Retail Dealers § 20-560 Definitions. As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Electronic cigarette. The term electronic cigarette means an electronic or battery-operated device that delivers an aerosol or emission for inhalation. Electronic cigarette also means any refill, cartridge, any other component of an electronic cigarette and any e-liquid. Electronic cigarette shall not include any product approved by the food and drug administration for sale as a drug or medical device. Electronic cigarette retail dealer. The term electronic cigarette retail dealer means any person engaged in the retail sale of electronic cigarettes. For the purposes of this subchapter and title 17 of this code, the possession or transportation at any one time of more than 20 electronic cigarettes or more than 12 fluid ounces (354.882 mL) of e- liquid by any person other than a manufacturer or a person delivering electronic cigarettes or e-liquids in the regular course of business for a manufacturer or electronic cigarette retail dealer, shall be presumptive evidence that such person is an electronic cigarette retail dealer. E-liquid. The term e-liquid means a solution, substance or material used in an electronic cigarette to produce an aerosol or emission to be inhaled by the user, whether or not the solution, substance or material contains nicotine. Good standing. The term good standing means any electronic cigarette retail dealer that has not been found to have violated subdivision b of section 17-704.1 or subdivision a-1 of section 17-706 on more than one day during the previous three consecutive years. Person. Notwithstanding sections 1-112 and 20-102 of the code, the term person means any individual, partnership, society, association, joint-stock company, corporation, limited liability company, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee or any other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of individuals. Pharmacy. The term pharmacy means pharmacy as defined in subdivision 1 of section 6802 of the education law, and any retail store that contains a pharmacy. Retail store. The term retail store means any place that, in the regular course of business, sells or rents goods directly to the public. § 20-561 License. a. License required of electronic cigarette retail dealers. 1. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as an electronic cigarette retail dealer without first having obtained a license as hereinafter prescribed for each place of business wherein such person engages in the retail sale of electronic cigarettes in the city. 2. It shall be unlawful for a person to permit any premises under such person's control to be used by any other person in violation of paragraph 1 of subdivision a of this section. 3. It shall be unlawful for a pharmacy to obtain a license to engage in business as an electronic cigarette retail dealer. b. License application. 1. In order to obtain a license to engage in business as an electronic cigarette retail dealer, a person shall file an application with the commissioner for a license for each place of business that such person desires to have for the retail sale of electronic cigarettes in the city. The application for each license or renewal thereof shall be made upon such form as prescribed by the commissioner and shall contain such information as the commissioner shall require. 2. The commissioner shall commence accepting applications for licenses to engage in business as an electronic cigarette retail dealer on the effective date of the local law that added this section, and shall continue accepting applications for 90 days following such commencement. (a) During the 90 day application period, the commissioner shall only accept applications for licenses to engage in business as an electronic cigarette retail dealer from persons who have been engaged in the retail sale of electronic cigarettes as of the date of enactment of this subchapter. (b) The commissioner may require proof of such engagement from applicants during the 90 day application period. 3. The commissioner shall not accept applications after the expiration of the 90 day application period unless the commissioner determines that acceptance of such applications would not result in the issuance of a license in excess of the community district electronic cigarette retail dealer cap established pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision e of this section. c. Fee and license term. 1. There shall be a biennial fee of $200 for a license to engage in the business of an electronic cigarette retail dealer at each place of business where electronic cigarettes are sold in the city. 2. All even-numbered licenses shall expire on November 30 of the even- numbered year, and all odd-numbered licenses shall expire on November 30 of the odd-numbered year, next succeeding the year in which the license is issued. d. Issuance of license and renewal of such license. 1. A license or renewal thereof shall be issued to a person to conduct the business of an electronic cigarette retail dealer for each place of business where such person engages in the retail sale of electronic cigarettes in the city only where: (a) an applicant for a license or renewal thereof meets all the requirements prescribed herein and any criteria in addition thereto established by the commissioner by rule as deemed necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter; (b) an applicant satisfies the commissioner that such person is fit and able to conduct the business of an electronic cigarette retail dealer; (c) the commissioner has not received notification from the commissioner of health and mental hygiene that the applicant is not in full compliance with any provision of chapter 7 of title 17 of this code or any rules promulgated by the commissioner of health and mental hygiene to effectuate the purposes of such provisions; and (d) the number of licenses in the community district in which the place of business of such applicant is located is lower than the community district electronic cigarette retail dealer cap. 2. An electronic cigarette retail dealer license shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for the persons in whose names it is issued and for the transaction of business in the place of business designated therein and shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the place of business for which it is issued. e. Community district electronic cigarette retail dealer cap. 1. After the expiration of the 90 day application period described in paragraph 2 of subdivision b of this section, the department may process applications for up to 120 days. After such 120 days, the commissioner shall establish a community district electronic cigarette retail dealer cap for each community district in the city. The initial community district electronic cigarette retail dealer cap shall be 50 percent of the total number of licenses issued to electronic cigarette retail dealers in the community district as determined by the department. 2. The department, in conjunction with the department of health and mental hygiene, shall evaluate community district electronic cigarette retail dealer caps every two years and any time community district boundaries change. Such evaluation shall include consideration of the number of electronic cigarette retail dealers and the prevalence of electronic cigarette use. If, based on the evaluation, the department of health and mental hygiene recommends further reductions to the community district electronic cigarette retail dealer cap, the department of health and mental hygiene shall advise the speaker of the city council of such recommendation. 3. Notwithstanding paragraph 3 of subdivision b, and subparagraph d of paragraph 1 of subdivision d, of this section, if: (a) a license of an electronic cigarette retail dealer expires at the end of a license term, such retail dealer may apply for renewal of such license; (b) a business whose owner has been issued an electronic cigarette retail dealer is sold, the succeeding owner may apply for a license for use at the same location, provided that the electronic cigarette retail dealer selling such business was in good standing at the time of such sale, and the application is received within thirty days of the applicable change of ownership; (c) an electronic cigarette retail dealer license becomes void pursuant to section 20-110, the succeeding beneficial owners of 10 percent or more of the stock of the organization to which a license had been granted may apply for a license provided that such electronic cigarette retail dealer was in good standing at the time the license became void, and the application is received within thirty days of the change of ownership; and (d) an electronic cigarette retail dealer license becomes void pursuant to section 20-111, the succeeding partnership may apply for a license, provided that such retail dealer was in good standing at the time the license became void and the application is received within thirty days of the change in ownership. § 20-562 Violations. a. In addition to the civil penalties authorized by section 17-710 for a violation of subdivision b of section 17-704.1 or of subdivision a-1 of section 17-706, an electronic cigarette retail dealer license shall be revoked for a second violation of subdivision b of section 17-704.1 or subdivision a-1 of section 17-706 involving the unlawful delivery or sale of electronic cigarettes occurring on different days at the same place of business within a three-year period. Any violation of subdivision b of section 17-704.1 or subdivision a-1 of section 17-706 involving the unlawful delivery or sale of electronic cigarettes by any license holder at a place of business shall be included in determining the number of violations by such license holder and by any subsequent license holder at the same place of business unless the subsequent license holder provides the commissioner with adequate documentation demonstrating that the subsequent license holder acquired the premises or business through an arm's length transaction and that the sale or lease was not conducted, in whole or in part, for the purpose of permitting the original licensee to avoid the effect of violations on the premises. An electronic cigarette retail dealer license shall be revoked at the same hearing at which an electronic cigarette retail dealer is found liable for a second violation or subsequent violations at the same place of business within a three-year period. b. For the purposes of this subdivision, the term arm's length transaction shall have the same definition as contained in subdivision d of section 20-202. Subchapter 36: Third-Party Food Delivery Services § 20-563 Definitions. As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: 1. Base wage. The term base wage means money paid, whether by the hour or otherwise, to a food delivery worker by a third-party food delivery service in exchange for work performed, not including gratuities, bonuses, allowances, shift differentials or other monetary payments that may contribute to such food delivery worker's total compensation. 2. Credit card. The term credit card means any credit card, charge card, courtesy card, debit card, or other device issued by a person to another person which may be used to obtain a cash advance or a loan or credit, or to purchase or lease property or services on the credit of the person issuing the credit card or a person who has agreed with the issuer to pay obligations arising from the use of a credit card issued to another person. 3. Customer data. The term customer data means the following information provided to a third-party food delivery service by a customer who has placed an online order: (i) Name; (ii) Telephone number; (iii) E-mail address; (iv) The delivery address of the online order; and (v) The contents of the online order being requested to be fulfilled by a food service establishment. 4. Delivery fee. The term delivery fee means a fee charged by a third-party food delivery service for providing a food service establishment with a service that delivers food from such establishment to customers. The term does not include any other fee that may be charged by a third-party food delivery service to a food service establishment, such as fees for listing or advertising the food service establishment on the third-party food delivery platform or fees related to processing the online order. 5. Direct telephone number. The term direct telephone number means a telephone number by which the caller communicates directly with a food service establishment, which is not a third-party telephone number. 6. Food delivery worker. The term food delivery worker means a natural person who is hired or retained as an independent contractor by a food service establishment, as an independent contractor of a third-party food delivery service or as an independent contractor of a third-party courier service, as defined in section 20-1501, to deliver food or beverage from such establishment to a consumer in exchange for compensation. 7. Food service establishment. The term food service establishment means a business establishment located in the city where food is provided for individual portion service directly to the consumer whether such food is provided free of charge or sold, and whether consumption occurs on or off the premises or is provided from a pushcart, stand or vehicle. 8. Gratuity. The term gratuity means a sum of money (i) paid voluntarily by a customer when placing an online order or after delivery of such online order, (ii) that is in addition to the purchase price and other mandatory charges such as taxes and fees, (iii) the amount of which the customer may choose, and (iv) that is referred to on the third-party food delivery platform as a gratuity, tip or other similar term that would suggest to a reasonable person that the sum, or a substantial portion thereof, would be received by the food delivery worker delivering goods in addition to such food delivery worker's base wage. 9. Internet-based payment system. The term internet-based payment system means any mobile application or other internet service that facilitates electronic payments. 10. Online order. The term online order means any order placed by a customer through or with the assistance of a third-party food delivery platform, including a telephone order. 11. Purchase price. The term purchase price means the total price of the items contained in an online order that are listed on the menu of the food service establishment where such order is placed. Such term does not include taxes, gratuities and any other fees that may make up the total cost to the customer of an online order. 12. Telephone order. The term telephone order means an order placed by a customer through a third-party telephone number. 13. Third-party food delivery platform. The term third-party food delivery platform means the online or mobile platform of the third-party food delivery service on which a customer can view products available for sale and place an online order for a food service establishment's products. 14. Third-party food delivery service. The term third-party food delivery service means any website, mobile application or other internet service that: (i) offers or arranges for the sale of food and beverages prepared by, and the same-day delivery or same-day pickup of food and beverages from, a food service establishment; and (ii) that is owned and operated by a person other than the person who owns such food service establishment. 15. Third-party telephone number. The term third-party telephone number means a telephone number for a food service establishment that is provided by or on behalf of a third-party food delivery service, through which an online order may be placed. 16. Toilet facility. The term toilet facility means a toilet facility on the premises of a food service establishment that is a dedicated facility for its patrons or that is a dedicated facility for its employees to the extent such establishment does not have a dedicated facility for its patrons. 17. Transaction fee. The term transaction fee means a charge for the processing of a payment for an online order imposed upon a third-party food delivery service either by: (i) a credit card issuer or (ii) an internet-based payment system. § 20-563.1 License. a. License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a third-party food delivery service without first having obtained a license therefor issued pursuant to this subchapter. All licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for no more than two years and expire on a date the commissioner prescribes by rule. b. License application. An application for any license required under this subchapter or for any renewal thereof shall be made to the commissioner in such form or manner as the commissioner shall prescribe by rule, provided that such application shall include, but need not be limited to: 1. The address of the applicant; 2. A list of all websites, mobile applications, or other third-party food delivery platforms, with relevant uniform resource locators, that the applicant uses or plans to use to conduct the business of a third-party food delivery service; 3. An e-mail address that the department can use to send the applicant license application materials, official notifications, or other correspondence; and 4. If the applicant is a non-resident of the city, the name and address of a registered agent within the city upon whom process or other notifications may be served. c. Fee. There shall be a biennial fee of $200 for a license to operate a third-party food delivery service. § 20-563.2 Issuance of license and certain restrictions on third-party food delivery service conduct. a. A license to operate a third-party food delivery service shall be granted in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and any rules promulgated by the commissioner thereunder. b. Restrictions on third-party food delivery service operations. 1. It shall be unlawful for a third-party food delivery service to solicit a gratuity for a food delivery worker hired, retained or engaged by such third-party food delivery service from a customer in connection with an online order unless such third-party food delivery service discloses, in plain language and in a conspicuous manner, the following information before or at the same time as such gratuity is solicited: (i) The proportion or fixed amount of each gratuity that is distributed to a food delivery worker who delivers the goods purchased; and (ii) How gratuities are distributed to a food delivery worker, including whether such gratuities are distributed immediately or otherwise, and whether such gratuities are distributed in cash or otherwise. 2. For each transaction, a food delivery worker hired, retained or engaged by a third-party food delivery service shall be notified of how much the customer paid as gratuity, if such customer paid additional gratuity, and if such customer decided to remove the gratuity and the reason for such removal, if such a reason is provided. Upon any change or payment of gratuity, a third-party delivery service shall notify such food delivery worker and credit such gratuity to such worker's account. 3. A third-party food delivery service shall disclose to a food delivery worker hired, retained or engaged by such third-party food delivery service, the aggregate amount of compensation and aggregate amount of gratuities earned by such food delivery worker on the day after such compensation and gratuities were earned. § 20-563.3 Fee caps. a. It shall be unlawful for a third-party food delivery service to charge a food service establishment a delivery fee that totals more than 15% of the purchase price of each online order. b. It shall be unlawful for a third-party food delivery service to charge a food service establishment any fee or fees, other than a delivery fee and a transaction fee, for the use of their service that totals more than 5% of the purchase price of each online order. c. It shall be unlawful for a third-party food delivery service to charge a food service establishment a transaction fee that totals more than 3% of the purchase price of each online order, provided however that a third-party food delivery service may charge a food service establishment a transaction fee of more than 3% of the purchase price of an online order if: (i) such transaction fee is charged to the food service establishment in the same amount as the charge imposed upon the third-party food delivery service for such online order, and (ii) such third-party food delivery service can provide proof of such charge imposed upon it to both the department and the relevant food service establishment upon request. d. No later than September 30, 2023, and every two years thereafter, the commissioner shall submit to the speaker of the council and the mayor a report on the fee cap pursuant to this section, which shall include but not be limited to recommendations related to either the maintenance or adjustment of the fee cap as set forth in this section, in consideration of factors from the immediately preceding two years, such as: 1. The effect of the cap on third-party food delivery services and food service establishments; 2. Whether the cap affects wages and working conditions for persons who deliver food or beverages for third-party food delivery services; 3. Products that third-party food delivery services offer to food service establishments for listing, processing and marketing; 4. The number of complaints made to the department related to the alleged violations of this subchapter and the number of violations issued under this subchapter; 5. The total amount of penalties imposed as a result of violations of this subchapter; and 6. The amount of restitution recovered on behalf of food service establishments pursuant to this subchapter. § 20-563.4 Telephone orders. No third-party food delivery service may charge any fee from a food service establishment for a telephone order if a telephone call between such establishment and a customer does not result in an actual transaction during such telephone call. § 20-563.5 Telephone number listings. a. A third-party food delivery service that lists or links to a telephone number for a food service establishment shall include in such listing or link the direct telephone number of such food service establishment. A third-party food delivery service may also list or link to a third-party telephone number in addition to such direct telephone number, provided that such listing or link includes a prominent and conspicuous description of each telephone number, including but not limited to identification of each telephone number as a third-party telephone number or a direct telephone number, as applicable, and any fee associated with the use of each telephone number for telephone orders, whether imposed on the food service establishment or on the caller. b. The commissioner shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section, including but not limited to defining the contents, size and location of the descriptions required by this section. § 20-563.6 Unauthorized listings. a. A third-party food delivery service shall not list, advertise, promote, or sell a food service establishment's products on, or arrange for the delivery of an order of such products through, the website, mobile application or other platform of such third-party food delivery service without a written agreement between such third-party food delivery service and such food service establishment to include the food service establishment's products on such website, mobile application or other platform. b. An agreement executed in accordance with this section shall include a provision requiring that a toilet facility is available for the use of food delivery workers lawfully on such establishment's premises to pick up such establishment's food or beverage for consumer delivery, except (i) where accessing the toilet facility would require a food delivery worker to walk through such establishment's kitchen, food preparation or storage area or utensil washing area to access such facility, pursuant to subdivision d of section 81.22 of the health code; (ii) where accessing the toilet facility would create an obvious health and safety risk to the food delivery worker or to the establishment; or (iii) any additional exceptions that the commissioner promulgates by rule. Such agreement shall shall not include a provision, clause, or covenant that requires a food service establishment to indemnify a third-party food delivery service, any independent contractor acting on behalf of the third-party food delivery service, or any registered agent of the third- party food delivery service, for any damages or harm by an act or omission occurring after the food service establishment's product leaves the place of business of the food service establishment. To the extent an agreement executed in accordance with this section contains such a provision, such provision shall be deemed void and unenforceable. § 20-563.7 Customer data. a. A food service establishment may request customer data from a third- party food delivery service. Upon such a request, a third-party food delivery service shall provide to the food service establishment all applicable customer data, until such food service establishment requests to cease receiving such customer data. b. Notwithstanding the requirements of subdivision a of this section, a third-party food delivery service shall not share customer data applicable to an online order pursuant to subdivision a of this section if such customer requests that such data not be shared in relation to such online order. The customer shall be presumed to have consented to the sharing of such customer data applicable to all online orders unless such customer has made such a request in relation to a specific online order. The third-party food delivery service shall provide in a conspicuous manner on its website, in a style and form required by the commissioner, a means for a customer to make such request. To assist its customers with deciding whether their data should be shared, a third-party food delivery service shall clearly and conspicuously disclose to the customer the customer data that may be shared with the food service establishment and shall identify the food service establishment fulfilling such customer's online order as a recipient of such data. c. Third-party food delivery services that share customer data pursuant to this section shall provide such data in a machine-readable format, disaggregated by customer, on an at least monthly basis. Third-party food delivery services shall not limit the ability of food service establishments to download and retain such data, nor limit their use of such data for marketing or other purposes outside of the third-party food delivery service website, mobile application or other internet service. d. Food service establishments that receive customer data pursuant to this section shall not sell, rent, or disclose such customer data to any other party in exchange for financial benefit, except with the express consent of the customer from whom the customer data was collected; shall enable a customer to withdraw their consent to use of their data by the food service establishment; and shall delete any such customer data upon request by a customer. e. Nothing in this section shall prevent a third-party food delivery service or a food service establishment from complying with any other law or rule. § 20-563.8 Records. a. Every third-party food delivery service required to be licensed under this subchapter shall maintain the following records in an electronic format for a period of at least three years: 1. A roster of all food service establishments the third-party food delivery service lists on its website, mobile application, or other third-party food delivery platform and has listed on such website, mobile application, or other third-party food delivery platform; 2. All written agreements with a food service establishment; 3. Records listing itemized fees the third-party food delivery service has charged each food service establishment with which the third-party food delivery service maintains an agreement; 4. Such records related to the ownership of the third-party food delivery service as the commissioner may prescribe by rule; 5. Records demonstrating compliance with the requirements set forth in subdivisions c, d and e of section 20-563.2 of this subchapter; and 6. Such other records as the commissioner may prescribe by rule. b. All records required by this section or by the commissioner by rule shall be made available to the department electronically upon request, consistent with applicable law and in accordance with rules promulgated hereunder and with appropriate notice. § 20-563.9 Denial, renewal, suspension and revocation of license. In addition to any powers of the commissioner and not in limitation thereof, the commissioner may deny or refuse to renew any license required under this subchapter and may suspend or revoke any such license, after due notice and opportunity to be heard, if the applicant or licensee, or, where applicable, any of its officers, principals, directors, members, managers, employees, or stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation, is found to have: a. Committed two or more violations of any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder in the preceding two years; b. Made a material false statement or concealed a material fact in connection with the filing of any application pursuant to this subchapter; c. Committed two or more violations of chapter five of title twenty of this code and any rules promulgated thereunder in the preceding two years; or d. Committed two or more violations of chapter fifteen of title twenty of this code and any rules promulgated thereunder in the preceding two years. § 20-563.10 Enforcement, civil penalties and restitution. a. Any person who violates, or causes another person to violate, a provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated pursuant thereto, shall be subject to a civil penalty that shall not exceed $500 for each violation, except that a person that violates any provision of section 20-563.3 or any rule promulgated pursuant thereto shall be subject to a civil penalty that shall not exceed $1,000 for each violation. Violations by third- party food delivery services under this subchapter shall accrue on a daily basis for each day and for each food service establishment with respect to which a violation of this subchapter or any rule promulgated pursuant to this subchapter was committed. The department may also recover restitution on behalf of any food service establishment harmed by a violation of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter by a third-party food delivery service. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty or restitution authorized pursuant to this subchapter may be brought in any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or within any agency of the city designated to conduct such proceedings. § 20-563.11 Enforcement by the corporation counsel. a. A civil action may be brought by the corporation counsel on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover any or all of the following: 1. Civil penalties authorized by this section; 2. Injunctive relief to restrain or enjoin any activity in violation of this subchapter; 3. Restitution in an amount not to exceed the amount of fees collected by a third-party food delivery service in excess of the maximum amounts permitted pursuant to this subchapter; 4. Attorneys' fees and costs, and such other remedies as a court may deem appropriate. b. 1. Where reasonable cause exists to believe that a third-party food delivery service is engaged in a pattern or practice of violations of this subchapter, the corporation counsel may commence a civil action on behalf of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction. 2. A civil action pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall be commenced by filing a complaint setting forth facts relating to such pattern or practice and requesting relief, which may include injunctive relief, civil penalties and any other appropriate relief. 3. In any civil action commenced pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision, the trier of fact may impose a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 for a finding that a third-party food delivery service has engaged in a pattern or practice of violations of this subchapter. Any civil penalty so recovered shall be paid into the general fund of the city. c. The corporation counsel may initiate any investigation to ascertain such facts as may be necessary for the commencement of a civil action pursuant to this section, and in connection therewith shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, to administer oaths and to examine such persons as are deemed necessary. d. Nothing in this section prohibits a person alleging a violation of this subchapter from filing a civil action pursuant to section 20-563.12 based on the same facts as a civil action commenced by the corporation counsel pursuant to this section. § 20-563.12 Private cause of action. Any person alleging a violation of any provision of this subchapter may bring a civil action, in accordance with applicable law, in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover any or all of the following remedies: a. Injunctive relief to restrain or enjoin any activity in violation of this subchapter; b. Restitution in an amount not to exceed the amount of fees collected by a third-party food delivery service in excess of the maximum amounts permitted pursuant to this subchapter; and c. Attorneys' fees and costs, and such other remedies as a court may deem appropriate. § 20-563.13 Outreach. No more than 60 days after the effective date of this local law, and continuing for 90 days thereafter, the commissioner, in collaboration with relevant agencies, shall conduct culturally appropriate outreach in the designated citywide languages, as defined in section 23-1101, to alert food service establishments and third-party food delivery services to the requirements of this subchapter. Such outreach shall include, but need not be limited to, posting information on relevant agency websites and distributing information to food service establishments, third-party food delivery services and other relevant stakeholders. Subchapter 37: Construction Labor Providers § 20-564 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Construction. The term construction has the same meaning as defined in section 3302.1 of the New York city building code and does not include minor alterations and ordinary repairs, as defined in section 28-105.4.2.1 of such code. Construction labor provider. The term construction labor provider means a person who employs and supplies a covered construction worker to a third party client for the performance of construction work or manual labor for a construction project of such client on a site in the city, in exchange for compensation from such third party client, provided that the completion of such project is directed by such client or such client's contractor and not such person. The term construction labor provider does not mean: 1. An employment agency or an employee fee paid employment agency, as defined by article 11 of the general business law; 2. A professional employer organization, as defined by article 31 of the labor law; 3. A construction subcontractor that is responsible for and performs all of the following: (i) performing construction work on a project in accordance with a written contract for a defined scope of construction work at a fixed price; (ii) obtaining necessary licenses to perform construction services under the entity's name; (iii) exclusively controlling the subcontractor's workers, including having hiring and firing authority and direction of methods and means of construction work performed on the construction project; (iv) paying wages and fringe benefits to workers by the subcontractor and not any other person or entity, and maintaining required employment and payroll records by the subcontractor; (v) purchasing the majority of materials, supplies and tools for construction work performed by the subcontractor on the project; and (vi) maintaining workers' compensation and unemployment insurance coverage for periods preceding, during and succeeding the term of the construction project for the type and scope of construction work performed by the subcontractor on the project. The commissioner may promulgate rules requiring additional documentation to establish that an applicant is a construction subcontractor; or 4. A general contractor, as defined in section 28-401.3. Covered construction worker. The term covered construction worker means a person who is employed by a construction labor provider to perform construction work or manual labor on a construction site. Manual labor. The term manual labor means the type of physical work the performance of which classifies a natural person as a manual worker in accordance with section 190 of the labor law and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder. Retaliation. The term retaliation means any adverse employment action taken or threat to take adverse employment action by a construction labor provider against any person, or any action to directly or indirectly intimidate, threaten, coerce, command or influence or attempt to intimidate, threaten, coerce, command or influence any person because such person has taken an action to enforce, inquire about or inform others about the requirements of this subchapter. Successor. The term successor means a construction labor provider that does or has done two or more of the following: a. Uses the same facility, facilities or workforce to offer substantially the same services as a predecessor construction labor provider; b. Shared in the ownership, or otherwise exercised control over, the management of a predecessor construction labor provider; c. Employs in a managerial capacity any person who controlled the wages, hours, or working conditions of the affected employees of a predecessor construction labor provider; or d. Is an immediate family member, including a parent, step-parent, child, or step, foster or adopted child, of any owner, partner, officer, or director of a predecessor construction labor provider, or of any person who had a financial interest in the predecessor construction labor provider. Third party client. The term third party client means any person who contracts with a construction labor provider to obtain the services of a covered construction worker for construction work or manual labor at a construction site in the city. § 20-564.1 License. a. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a construction labor provider without first having obtained a license from the department pursuant to this subchapter. Licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for no more than two years and expire on a date the commissioner prescribes by rule. A license to operate as a construction labor provider shall be granted in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and any rules promulgated by the commissioner thereunder. b. There shall be a fee of $200 to apply for or renew a license issued under this subchapter. c. In addition to an applicant's name, address, email address, corporate structure and ownership, the names of each principal and officer, and other information as the commissioner may require, an applicant for a license required by this section or renewal thereof shall furnish the following information: 1. If the applicant is a non-resident of the city, the name and address of a registered agent within the city upon whom process or other notifications may be served. 2. A signed statement certifying: (a) Compliance with all laws, regulations and rules applicable to doing business as a construction labor provider; (b) That the applicant has no outstanding final judgments or warrants against the applicant in any action arising out of a violation of this subchapter or any rules promulgated thereunder; (c) That the applicant maintains a commercial general liability insurance policy in the amount of one million dollars per occurrence and two million dollars in the aggregate; and (d) That the applicant maintains workers' compensation coverage, unemployment insurance, and disability insurance for covered construction workers employed by such applicant, in compliance with law; 3. For the renewal of such license, the following information on business operations: (a) The total number of covered construction workers employed during the preceding license term; (b) The average hourly rate of wage paid to covered construction workers, as of the date of application, disaggregated by workers' compensation classification code; (c) Types and hourly value of supplemental benefits paid to covered construction workers, as of the date of application, disaggregated by workers' compensation classification code; (d) The name of each third party client during the preceding license term; and (e) The address of each site where covered construction workers worked during the preceding license term, disaggregated by third party client for whom the work was performed. d. Denial, renewal, suspension and revocation of license. In addition to any powers of the commissioner and not in limitation thereof, the commissioner may deny or refuse to renew any license required under this subchapter and may suspend or revoke any such license, after due notice and opportunity to be heard, if it is found that: 1. The applicant has failed to satisfy any fine or civil penalty ordered against such applicant in a judicial or administrative proceeding arising out of a violation of this subchapter or chapter one of this title or any rules promulgated thereunder; 2. An entity to which the applicant is a successor has failed to satisfy any fine or civil penalty ordered against such entity in a judicial or administrative proceeding arising out of a violation of this subchapter or chapter one of this title or any rules promulgated thereunder; 3. The applicant failed to answer a summons, notice of violation, request for records, or subpoena, appear for a hearing, or provide truthful information or documentation to the commissioner in connection with the application or other request for information; 4. The applicant or an entity to which the applicant is a successor committed two or more violations of any provision of this subchapter, chapter one of this title, chapter five of title twenty of this code, or any rules promulgated thereunder in the preceding two years; 5. There has been a final determination of liability against the applicant in a civil, criminal or administrative action involving egregious or repeated nonpayment or underpayment of wages or other illegal acts or omissions bearing a direct relationship to the fitness of the applicant to conduct the business; or 6. The applicant failed to submit the records described in section 20-564.4 for inspection by the department. § 20-564.2 Employee notices. a. Notice of rights. Every construction labor provider shall provide to each covered construction worker, in English and in the language identified by each covered construction worker as the primary language of such worker, at the time of hiring, a written notice of the rights of covered construction workers prepared and provided by the commissioner. Such notice shall include information on minimum wage, overtime, safe and sick leave, health and safety in the workplace, protections against employment discrimination, unemployment insurance, workers' compensation, and the rights to notices and to be free from retaliation under this subchapter. b. Certification notice. Every construction labor provider shall provide to each applicant for employment as a covered construction worker a written notice of any legally required certifications, trainings or other designations required to be completed or acquired by a covered construction worker either: 1. As a condition of hire by such construction labor provider; or 2. As a condition of performing any task performed by other workers hired for roles that are substantially similar to the one for which the covered construction worker was hired by such construction labor provider, or that such construction labor provider should otherwise reasonably anticipate such covered construction worker would be asked to perform if employed by such construction labor provider for at least one year. Such written notice shall be provided: (i) before such covered construction worker is asked to sign any employment contract with such provider or to otherwise agree to work for such provider, and (ii) anytime such requirements change, without undue delay. For any certification, training or other designation included on such notice, the construction labor provider shall disclose the expected cost of acquiring such certification, training or other designation, and whether such cost will be borne by such construction labor provider or such covered construction worker. c. Notice of assignment. 1. For contracts offered by a third party client more than 24 hours prior to the requested time of dispatch, at least 24 hours prior to dispatching a covered construction worker to a worksite for a third party client a construction labor provider shall provide the covered construction worker with a notice in writing containing the following information in a form and manner approved by the commissioner: (a) The name and business address of the third party client and any other entity responsible for supervising such covered construction worker's work during the assignment; (b) The address of the worksite; (c) The nature of the work to be performed and the types of equipment and protective clothing required for the assignment; (d) The anticipated number of hours of work, per week, or if less than a week, by day; (e) The anticipated duration of the assignment; (f) The wages offered, including whether prevailing wages would be owed for work performed, and whether supplemental benefits, including but not limited to health insurance, retirement funds and insurance premiums, would be paid for by the construction labor provider, the third party client or another entity; (g) The name of the party responsible for providing workers' compensation coverage for such covered construction worker and the insurance policy number covering such covered construction worker; and (h) Whether a meal or equipment, or both, are provided, either by the construction labor provider or the third party client, and the expected cost to the covered construction worker of the meal and equipment, if any. 2. For contracts offered by a third party client less than 24 hours prior to the requested time of dispatch, a construction labor provider shall provide a notice of assignment to a covered construction worker within 72 hours. Where such assignment is completed prior to 72 hours from the requested time of dispatch, no such notice is required. 3. If any of the information required to be provided by paragraph one of this subdivision changes, such construction labor provider shall update such covered construction worker in writing within 24 hours of such construction labor provider being informed of the change. d. Every construction labor provider shall provide to the third party client on each project for which covered construction workers have been contracted to work, and the owner of the property where work is being performed, as applicable, a copy of the information required by subdivisions a and c of this section, no later than seven days after the day on which such construction labor provider first dispatched a covered construction worker to a worksite for a third party client. Such construction labor provider shall additionally furnish such information upon such third party client's request at any time for the duration of the project. The third party client shall provide written acknowledgment of receipt of such information. e. A construction labor provider shall notify, both by telephone and in writing, each covered construction worker it employs and each third party client with whom it has a contract within 24 hours of any denial, suspension or revocation of its license by the department. f. A construction labor provider shall notify each covered construction worker it employs and each third party client with whom it has a contract of all final violations or penalties issued against such construction labor provider by the department or the office of administrative trials and hearings for violations of this subchapter, within 90 days of such issuance. § 20-564.3 Records. Every construction labor provider shall keep on file in its principal place of business for a period of three years the following records: a. Statements signed by each covered construction worker, in the language identified by each covered construction worker as their primary language, indicating that the covered construction worker received, read and understood the notices required to be provided to them pursuant to section 20-564.2 of this subchapter; b. All records necessary to verify the information reported in sections 20-564.1 and 20-564.2 of this subchapter; and c. Such other records as the commissioner may prescribe by rule. All records required by this section or by the commissioner by rule shall be made available to the department electronically upon request, consistent with applicable law and in accordance with rules promulgated hereunder and with appropriate notice. § 20-564.4 Third party clients. It is unlawful for a third party client to accept the services of a covered construction worker provided by a construction labor provider that is not licensed pursuant to this subchapter, if the provision of such services by such construction labor provider would require such a license. A construction labor provider shall provide each of its third party clients with a copy of their license issued by the department upon such client's request. If a third party client accepts the services of a construction labor provider who is not licensed but demonstrates the receipt of information from the construction labor provider or the department that inaccurately represents such provider as licensed, such client shall be held harmless. Each violation of this section shall subject a third party client to a civil penalty not to exceed $500. Each day during which a third party client accepts the services of a covered construction worker in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. § 20-564.5 Enforcement. a. Any person operating as a construction labor provider without a license issued by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter shall be liable for a civil penalty of $500 per day for every calendar day during which the unlicensed construction labor provider operated. A construction labor provider that violates section 20-564.2 or any rule promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty of $250 for a first violation, and $500 for each subsequent violation within one year of the first violation. Each covered construction worker or third party client for whom the construction labor provider did not provide a notification in accordance with such section shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Such penalties shall be in addition to any other civil or criminal penalties that may be applicable under any other law, rule or regulation. b. Any action or proceeding that may be appropriate or necessary for the correction of any violation issued pursuant to this subchapter, including, but not limited to, actions to secure permanent injunctions, enjoining any acts or practices which constitute such violation, mandating compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, seeking civil penalties for violations of this subchapter, or such other relief as may be appropriate, may be initiated in any court of competent jurisdiction by the corporation counsel or such other persons designated by the corporation counsel. § 20-564.6 Private right of action. Any covered construction worker who is aggrieved by a violation of this subchapter may commence an action in a court of competent jurisdiction on their own behalf against a construction labor provider. For each violation of section 20-564.2, the covered construction worker may recover damages of $500. If such violation of 20-564.2 was committed with intent or recklessness, the covered construction worker may recover damages of $1,000. Any person who is a victim of retaliation shall be entitled to all relief necessary to make such person whole, including, but not limited to: (i) an injunction to restrain any adverse or retaliatory action; (ii) reinstatement to the position such officer or employee would have had but for such action, or to an equivalent position; and (iii) reinstatement of full benefits and seniority rights including payment of any missed back pay, plus interest. Persons aggrieved by a violation of section 20-564.2 or by retaliation shall be entitled to compensation for any special damages sustained as a result of an action commenced pursuant to this section, including litigation costs and reasonable attorneys' fees; and to relief other than set forth in this section as the court may deem appropriate. Subchapter 38: Hotels § 20-565 Definitions. As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: 1. Airport hotel. The term “airport hotel” means a hotel within one mile of either LaGuardia airport or John F. Kennedy international airport. 2. Continuous coverage. The term “continuous coverage” means 24 hours a day on any day that the hotel is occupied by a guest. 3. Core employee. The term “core employee” means any employee whose job classification is related to housekeeping, front desk, or front service at a hotel. Such classifications include, but are not limited to, room attendants, house persons, and bell or door staff. Such classifications shall not include: laundry and valet employees; concierge, reservation agents and telephone operators; engineering and maintenance employees; specialty cleaning employees, including marble polishers, crystal lighting cleaners, aquarium cleaners, night cleaners and exterior window washing; parking employees; security employees; life guards; spa, gym and health club employees; minibar employees; audio- visual employees; and cooks, stewards, bartenders, servers, bussers, barbacks, room service attendants or other employees who primarily work in the food or beverage service operations of the hotel regardless of whether such employees are directly employed by the hotel operator or by another person. 4. Directly employ. The term “directly employ” or “direct employment” means a relationship between an employer and an employee in which there is no intermediary in such relationship. 5. Employee. The term employee means any person covered by the definition of employee set forth in subdivision 5 of section 651 of the labor law or by the definition of employee set forth in subsection (e) of section 203 of title 29 of the United States code and who is employed within the city. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the term employee does not include any person who is employed by (i) the United States government; (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state, including the legislature and the judiciary; or (iii) the city or any local government, municipality or county or any entity governed by section 92 of the general municipal law or section 207 of the county law. 6. Employer. The term employer means any person or entity covered by the definition of employer set forth in subdivision 6 of section 651 of the labor law or any person or entity covered by the definition of employer set forth in in subsection (d) of section 203 of title 29 of the United States code. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the term employer does not include (i) the United States government; (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state including the legislature and the judiciary; or (iii) the city or any local government, municipality or county or any entity governed by section 92 of the general municipal law or section 207 of the county law. 10. Front desk. The term “front desk” means on-site staff in a hotel that are available to assist guests who may check-in or reserve a guest room. 11. Guest room. The term “guest room” means a room, including an interconnected room or a suite, made available or used by a hotel for transient occupancy by guests, but does not include a room not available or used for transient occupancy, including but not limited to, a single room occupancy unit and a residential unit. 12. Hotel. The term “hotel” means a building, as defined in section 12-10 of the New York city zoning resolution, or part of such building, which is legally authorized to have guests occupy guest rooms. 13. Hotel operator. The term “hotel operator” or “operator” means any person who owns, leases, or manages a hotel and is in control of the day-to-day operations of such hotel, including employment of natural persons who work at such hotel, by virtue of their ownership, management agreement, lease, or other legal construct. 14. Hotel owner. The term “hotel owner” or “owner” means the owner or owners of the hotel. 15. Human trafficking. The term “human trafficking” shall mean an act or threat of an act that may constitute sex trafficking, as defined in section 230.34 of the penal law, child sex trafficking, as defined in section 230.34-a of the penal law, accomplice to sex trafficking, as defined in section 230.36 of the penal law, or labor trafficking, as defined in sections 135.35, 135.36, and 135.37 of the penal law. 16. Large hotel. The term “large hotel” means a hotel with more than 400 guest rooms. 17. Occupied guest room. The term “occupied guest room” means that a guest room has been reserved by a guest. Overnight. The term “overnight” means the work shift containing the hours between 12:00 am and 2:00 am. 18. Panic button. The term “panic button” means a help or distress signaling system a natural person may activate in order to alert a security guard, or other appropriate on-site natural person who is available to provide immediate on-scene assistance that such person is in danger, and which provides such security guard, or other appropriate on-site natural person the location of such person. 19. Person. The term “person” shall have the same meaning as the term “person” in section 1-112, except that such term shall not include the city of New York, the state of New York, and the federal government or any other governmental entity, or any individual or entity that has an agreement with any such governmental entity to manage real property on behalf of such governmental entity. 20. Security guard. The term “security guard” means a natural person who is registered to work as a security guard under article 7-a of the general business law. 21. Small hotel. The term “small hotel” means a hotel with less than 100 guest rooms. 22. Transient. The term “transient” means use for less than 30 days. § 20-565.1 Hotel license issuance and renewal; application; fee. a. It shall be unlawful to operate a hotel without a license. Where no license has been obtained, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that an owner of a hotel is the operator of such hotel. b. A license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for a term of two years. The fee for such license shall be $350. § 20-565.2 Issuance, denial, renewal, suspension and revocation of license. a. A license to operate a hotel shall be granted in accordance with the provisions of this title. b. To obtain or renew a hotel license, a hotel operator shall file an application in such form and detail as the commissioner shall prescribe, and shall furnish the commissioner with the following: 1. The name, address, contact phone number, and electronic mail address of such hotel operator; 2. Such information as the commissioner shall require to establish that the operator has adequate procedures and safeguards to ensure compliance with this subchapter, including compliance with the staffing requirements of subdivisions a and b of 20-565.4, the safety requirements of subdivision b of 20-565.5*, the guest room cleanliness standards of subdivision c of 20-565.5*, the direct employment provisions of 20-565.6*, and the panic button provisions of 20-565.7*. The provisions of this paragraph shall be satisfied by a collective bargaining agreement that expressly incorporates the requirements of this subchapter. Such satisfaction shall continue for the longer of the duration of the collective bargaining agreement or ten years from date of the application, provided that the hotel shall notify the commissioner if such agreement is modified to remove the incorporation of the requirements of this subchapter. Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to diminish the rights, privileges, or remedies of any employee under any collective bargaining agreement; and * Editor's note: As set forth in ; correct references appear to be the safety requirements of subdivision b of 20-565.4, the guest room cleanliness standards of subdivision c of 20-565.4, the direct employment provisions of 20-565.5, and the panic button provisions of 20-565.6. 3. Such other information as the commissioner may require. c. A Hotel license shall not be assignable, except for transfers made in accordance with section 22-510, provided that such successor hotel operator notify the commissioner of the transfer, provide all the information required by paragraph 1 of subdivision b of section 20-565.2, and makes all required submissions to the department prior to the expiration of the predecessor’s license, provided further than nothing here shall excuse noncompliance with the provisions of this subchapter. d. A licensee who has submitted the application forms and fees required to renew their license pursuant to this subchapter shall be permitted to operate a hotel until they receive a determination from the commissioner. Failure by the commissioner to make a determination prior to the expiration date of an applicant’s license shall not be cause to cease operation of a hotel. e. Prior to any revocation, the commissioner shall first notify the licensee of an anticipated revocation in writing and afford the licensee thirty days from the date of such notification to correct the condition. The commissioner shall notify the licensee of such thirty-day period in writing. If the licensee proves to the satisfaction of the commissioner that the condition has been corrected within such thirty-day period, the commissioner shall not revoke such license. The commissioner shall permit such proof to be submitted to the commissioner electronically or in person. The licensee may seek review by the commissioner of the determination that the licensee has not submitted such proof within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. f. Neither the existence of service disruptions as defined in section 20-850 nor any remedied violations pursuant to section 20-851 shall constitute a basis for the commissioner to fail to approve, deny, suspend, revoke or fail to renew a license hereunder. § 20-565.3 Display of license; inspections. a. Each licensee shall conspicuously display a true copy of the license issued pursuant to this subchapter in publicly visible areas of the hotel where other legally required notices may be displayed. b. In accordance with applicable law and rules, the commissioner may inspect a hotel for violations of this subchapter and rules promulgated thereunder. § 20-565.4 Service requirements and prohibitions. a. Front desk staffing. 1. Except as provided by paragraph 2 of this subdivision, a hotel operator must schedule at least one employee to provide continuous coverage of a front desk. 2. During an overnight shift, in lieu of such front desk staff, an operator of a hotel may schedule a security guard who is able to assist guests and has undergone human trafficking recognition training in accordance with this subchapter. 3. The staff required pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 of subdivision a of this section must be available to confirm the identity of guests checking in to such hotel. b. Security guards. 1. Each hotel must maintain safe conditions for guests and hotel workers. 2. An operator of a large hotel must schedule at least one security guard to provide continuous coverage on the premises of such hotel while any guest room in such hotel is occupied. c. Guest room cleanliness. 1. An operator of a hotel must maintain the cleanliness of guest rooms, sanitary facilities, and hotel common areas. 2. An operator of a hotel must provide every guest room with clean towels, sheets, and pillowcases prior to occupancy by a new guest. 3. Upon request by a guest, an operator of a hotel must replace the towels, sheets, and pillowcases of an occupied guest room. 4. An operator of a hotel must clean an occupied guest room and remove trash daily unless a guest affirmatively declines such cleaning and trash removal services. Hotels may not impose any fee or collect any charge for daily room cleaning nor offer any discount or incentive to forgo daily room cleaning. d. Prohibition against short duration bookings. An operator of a hotel, other than an airport hotel, may not accept reservations for a guest room for a duration of less than 4 hours. e. Prohibition against facilitating human trafficking. An operator of a hotel may not permit the premises of such hotel to be used for the purposes of human trafficking. § 20-565.5 Direct employment. a. Direct employment required for core employees. A hotel owner of a hotel other than a small hotel must directly employ all core employees, except as provided in this section. b. A hotel operator must provide a human trafficking recognition training in accordance with section 205 of the general business law to core employees. A hotel operator must provide human trafficking recognition training to a new core employee within 60 days of employment. c. Except for hotel owners of small hotels, contracting to any third parties for core employees, including staffing agencies or other contractors or subcontractors, is not permitted except that a hotel owner may retain a single hotel operator to manage all hotel operations involving core employees at a hotel on the hotel owner’s behalf, which includes employment of core employees of the hotel by the hotel operator. Where a hotel owner retains a hotel operator in accordance with this subsection, a hotel owner need not be a direct employer of core employees. § 20-565.6 Panic buttons. A hotel operator must provide panic buttons to core employees, at no cost to any such employee, whose duties involve entering occupied guest rooms. § 20-565.7 Retaliatory actions by hotels; prohibition. a. A hotel operator shall not take any retaliatory action against an employee, including but not limited to a core employee, for taking any of the actions described in paragraphs 1 through 3 of this subdivision: 1. discloses, or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public body any specific activity, policy, or practice of such hotel operator that the employee reasonably and in good faith believes is in violation of this chapter or that the employee reasonably and in good faith believes poses a substantial and specific danger to the public health or safety; or 2. provides information to, or testifies before, any public body conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any such activity, policy, or practice by such hotel operator; or 3. objects to, or refuses to participate in any such activity, policy, or practice provided that such hotel employee has a reasonable, good faith belief that such activity, policy or practice subjects such employee to unusually dangerous conditions which are not normally part of such employee’s job. b. Any person alleging a violation of the provisions of this section may bring a civil action, in accordance with applicable law, in any court of competent jurisdiction. c. Such court may order compensatory, injunctive and declaratory relief, and reasonable attorney’s fees and costs. d. A civil action under this section shall be commenced within six months of the date the person knew or should have known of the alleged violation. e. A person filing a civil action under this section shall simultaneously serve notice of such action and a copy of the complaint upon the department. Failure to so serve a notice shall not adversely affect any person's cause of action. § 20-565.8 Enforcement and penalties. a. A hotel operator who violates or causes another person to violate a provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated pursuant to such subchapter, in addition to any other applicable penalties provided in this title, shall be subject to a civil penalty as follows: 1. for the first violation, a civil penalty of $500; 2. for the second violation issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a civil penalty of $1,000; 3. for the third violation issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a civil penalty of $2,500; and 4. for the fourth and any subsequent violations issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a civil penalty of $5,000. b. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty pursuant to this section shall be commenced by the service of a summons or notice of violation by the department, which shall be returnable to the office of administrative trials and hearings or any other tribunal designated to conduct such proceedings.Chapter 3: Weights and Measures § 20-571 Fees. All fees for permits issued by the department shall be paid to the department. § 20-572 Transfers of permits or licenses. Written approval of the commissioner shall be required for the transfer or assignment of any permit or license under his or her jurisdiction. § 20-573 Adjustment of controversies. The commissioner of ports and trade may adjust and settle any claims and controversies in regard to rents and other matters which appertain to leases of market lands. § 20-574 Rules and regulations. a. The commissioner shall have power to adopt and amend such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out his or her powers and duties pursuant to this chapter. b. Violations. Any person who shall violate any of such rules and regulations shall be guilty of an offense triable by a judge of the New York city criminal court, and punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars and not more than two hundred fifty dollars for each offense or by imprisonment not exceeding ten days, or by both. § 20-575 Waterfront property adjoining market lands; highways through or bounding market places. Nothing contained in this chapter shall interfere with the jurisdiction of the department of ports and trade over any waterfront property in and around any market lands, nor with the jurisdiction of the commissioner of transportation over market lands, insofar as it concerns his or her powers over highways. § 20-576 City sealer. The commissioner, or such officer or employee in the department as he or she may designate, shall have all of the powers and perform all of the duties of a sealer of weights and measures pursuant to section one hundred eighty of the agriculture and markets law. § 20-577 Inspectors of markets, weights and measures. a. The commissioner shall have power and it shall be his or her duty to appoint a chief inspector of markets, weights and measures and inspectors of markets, weights and measures. The title of inspectors of live poultry and weighmasters shall be abolished and all persons occupying those titles shall henceforth have the title of inspector of markets, weights and measures, with all the powers and duties of that title. Wherever any reference to the title or duties of inspector of live poultry or weighmaster appears in this code, the title or duties of inspector of markets, weights and measures shall be substituted therefor. b. Each inspector is hereby authorized and empowered, subject to the regulations of the department, to enforce any law, rule or regulation pertaining to the weights and dimensions of vehicles and to proceed under the provisions of article one hundred fifty of the criminal procedure law, in the same manner and with like force and effect as a police officer in respect to procuring, countersigning and serving the appearance tickets referred to therein in cases arising out of the enforcement of any such law, rule or regulation. § 20-578 Bureau of weights and measures. There shall be a bureau of weights and measures in the department under the supervision of the chief inspector of weights and measures. § 20-579 Employees not to engage in business. It shall be unlawful for the commissioner or any officer or employee of such bureau, to engage in the business of manufacturing, vending or selling any weighing or measuring device, under the penalty of fifty dollars for each offense. § 20-580 Return of department property. Whenever any inspector shall resign or be removed from office, he or she shall deliver at the office of the commissioner all the standard weights and measures and other official property in his or her possession. § 20-581 Inspecting. a. Each inspector of markets, weights and measures is hereby authorized to inspect, examine, test and seal at least once in each year, and as often as the commissioner may deem proper, all weighing and measuring devices. Upon the written request of any resident of the city, the commissioner shall test or cause to be tested, within a reasonable time after the receipt of such request, the weighing or measuring devices used in buying or selling by the person making such request. All such appliances shall be marked by the inspector with the initials of his or her name and the date on which the same shall be sealed and marked. b. Such books shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to any police officer, inspector or person duly authorized by the commissioner, or by any judge of the criminal court of the city of New York. § 20-582 Reports of inspectors. Each inspector shall report promptly to the commissioner the names of all persons whose weighing and measuring devices shall be found to be incorrect. Each inspector shall file a daily report with the commissioner, and make such other and further reports and keep such further records as may be required, from time to time, by the commissioner. § 20-583 Certificate of inspection. Each inspector shall furnish a certificate to the owner of the weights or measures inspected, and shall keep a record of each certificate given on a corresponding stub. The certificates and corresponding stubs shall be numbered consecutively. The books containing the stubs, after the corresponding certificates have been given out, shall be a public record. The commissioner, when required, shall certify extracts from such records. § 20-584 Testing, sealing and marking. It shall be unlawful to use any weighing or measuring device unless the same shall have been tested, sealed and marked by the commissioner or an inspector of such bureau. § 20-585 Standard measures and containers. It shall be unlawful to manufacture, construct, sell, offer for sale, or give away, any dry or liquid measure, or any barrel, pail, basket, vessel, or container, intended to be used in the purchase or sale of any commodity or article of merchandise, unless it shall be so constructed as to conform to the standards provided by article sixteen of the agriculture and markets law. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any barrel, cask, pail, basket, vessel or container, in the purchase or sale of any commodity or article of merchandise, unless it shall conform to such standards. § 20-586 Sale of weights and measures. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, or give away any weighing or measuring devices or the tools, appliances or accessories connected therewith, intended to be used for the purchase or sale of any commodity or article of merchandise, or for public weighing, unless the type or types of such weighing or measuring devices, or the tools, appliances or accessories connected therewith, with specifications as to construction, shall have been submitted to and approved by the commissioner. The commissioner, when such types are approved, shall designate and identify them by a serial number. A record of the serial numbers and the persons to whom such numbers are assigned shall be kept in the office of the commissioner. The commissioner shall keep a register of the name of each person whose weighing or measuring devices have been inspected, together with their serial numbers and size, and whether approved or condemned, with the date of inspection. Such record shall be a public record. § 20-587 Sale by true weight or measure required. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any commodity or article of merchandise, at or for a greater weight or measure than the true weight or measure thereof; for the purposes of this section the true weight of frozen poultry, shall be the net weight thereof exclusive of any food product or substance added or combined therewith; and all such commodities and articles of merchandise shall be weighed or measured by duly tested devices, sealed and marked by the commissioner or an inspector of the bureau; provided, that vegetables may be sold by the head or bunch. § 20-588 Confiscation of false weights or measures. Any weight which upon being tested is found to be short a quarter of an ounce or more; or any scale of a capacity greater than four hundred pounds, which upon being tested, is found to be short in weight by a quarter of a pound or more; or any scale of a capacity of between two hundred forty and four hundred pounds, which upon being tested is found to be short two ounces or more; or any scale of a capacity greater than four hundred pounds, which upon being tested, is found to be short five ounces or more; or any scale which is in an unfit condition to be used by being worn out, badly rusted, or by any other cause; or any measure or utensil being used in the sale or purchase of any commodity or article of merchandise, which does not conform to the standards provided by article sixteen of the agriculture and markets law, may be summarily confiscated and destroyed by the commissioner or an inspector of the bureau. § 20-589 Alteration of tested appliances. It shall be unlawful to render inaccurate, any device, to be used in weighing or measuring any commodity or article of merchandise, after such device has been tested, sealed and marked by the commissioner or an inspector of the bureau. § 20-590 Repair of inaccurate appliances. Within five days after the condemnation of a weighing or measuring device, the owner thereof, at his or her own expense, shall cause the same to be conformed to the standards established by article sixteen of the agriculture and markets law, and within twenty-four hours thereof, shall cause notice, in writing, of such alteration to be mailed or served personally upon such bureau. The seal upon any such device shall remain affixed and unbroken unless removed pursuant to section one hundred eighty-three of the agriculture and markets law. § 20-591 Interference with inspectors. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, hinder or molest the commissioner or any inspector of the bureau in the performance of his or her duties. § 20-592 Violations; report of. The commissioner shall report forthwith to the corporation counsel the names and places of business of all persons violating the provisions of this chapter, and of all persons making use of any fraudulent or unsealed weighing or measuring devices. § 20-593 Punishment. Any person who shall violate any of the foregoing provisions for the regulation of weights and measures or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall forfeit and pay a penalty of fifty dollars for the first violation, seventy- five dollars for the second violation and one hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent violation; except that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first-time violation of section 20-595 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-595 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. § 20-594 Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of sections 20-583 through 20-593 of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense triable by a judge of the New York city criminal court, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined the sum of not less than twenty-five dollars and not more than two hundred fifty dollars for each offense, or by imprisonment not exceeding ten days, or by both. § 20-595 Labels and signage. a. All information required by this chapter, or by rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, to appear on a container, as such term is used in this chapter and in any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be represented in the English language. A translation in any language other than English of such information may supplement the representation to provide fuller consumer information. b. Whenever it is required by law or rule that a scale, weighing or measuring device be provided for customer use, a prominent and conspicuous sign or poster shall be posted on or above the scale, weighing or measuring device stating that the device is for customer use and may be used to reweigh customer purchases, in language and in accordance with any other specifications that the commissioner shall set by rule. Chapter 4: Regulation of Commodities and Services Subchapter 1: Dealers in Second-Hand Weighing or Measuring Devices § 20-601 License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or conduct the business of dealing in, trading in, selling, receiving or repairing condemned, rebuilt or used weighing or measuring devices without a permit therefor. § 20-602 Application for permit. a. Any person before engaging in such business shall file a written application with the commissioner for such permit, stating in such application the location of the place in which such business is to be conducted. b. Such application shall be in the form prescribed by such commissioner. c. Such permit shall be granted only to a person of the age of eighteen years or over. § 20-603 Permit; fee. a. After the filing of such an application, and investigation thereof duly made, the commissioner, if he or she approves of such application, may issue a permit conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and with the rules and regulations of any city agency applicable to such permittee. b. The fee for such permit for a year, or any portion thereof, shall be sixty dollars, and shall be payable upon the filing of such application. c. Such permit shall expire on the twenty-eighth day of February next succeeding the date of issuance thereof. § 20-604 Notice as to repaired devices. Every person engaged in the business of dealing in, trading in, selling, receiving or repairing condemned, rebuilt or used weighing or measuring devices, within five days after the making of a repair, or the sale and delivery of a repaired, rebuilt, or used weighing or measuring device, shall serve notice in writing on the commissioner giving the name and address of the person for whom such repair has been made, or to whom a repaired, rebuilt or used weighing or measuring device has been sold or delivered, and shall include a statement that such device has been so altered, rebuilt or repaired as to conform to the standard specifications and regulations of such department. § 20-605 Condemned devices; return of tags. Any person who accepts weighing or measuring devices in trade for others shall remove the condemned tags from those devices which have been condemned by the department and which are intended for dismantling or destruction. Such tags shall be returned to the department within five days thereafter, with a statement describing the weighing or measuring device, giving the name and address of the person from whom it was received, and a statement to the effect that it has been dismantled or destroyed. § 20-606 Records. a. Every person duly registered pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall maintain a book or register in which the following information shall be kept: 1. The name and address of every person for whom weighing or measuring devices are repaired; 2. The name and address of every person to whom a repaired, rebuilt, or used weighing or measuring device has been sold or delivered. b. Such books shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to any police officer, inspector or person duly authorized by the commissioner, or by any judge of the criminal court of the city of New York. § 20-607 Comparison of testing equipment. All persons dealing in, trading in, selling, receiving or repairing condemned, rebuilt or used weighing or measuring devices, shall submit their testing equipment at least once a year, to the testing station of the department for comparison and calibration with the prime standards maintained by such department, after which the department shall issue to such person a statement or certificate of its findings. § 20-608 Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum of not more than one hundred dollars for each offense, or by imprisonment not exceeding ten days, or by both, and, in the discretion of the commissioner, shall be liable to have his or her permit suspended, revoked or cancelled. Subchapter 2: Powered Mobility Devices. Repealed. § 20-609 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Powered bicycle. The term powered bicycle means a bicycle with electric assist as defined in section 102-c of the vehicle and traffic law. Powered mobility device. The term powered mobility device means an electric scooter as defined in section 114-e of the vehicle and traffic law or successor provision or other personal mobility device powered by a lithium-ion or other storage battery. The term does not include powered bicycles, wheelchairs or other mobility devices designed for use by persons with disabilities, or any vehicle that is capable of being registered with the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles. Stock keeping unit. The term stock keeping unit means each group of items offered for sale of the same brand name, quantity of contents, retail price and variety. Repealed. § 20-610 Sale, lease, and rental of powered bicycles, powered mobility devices, and storage batteries for such devices. a. No person shall distribute, sell, lease, rent or offer for sale, lease or rental a powered bicycle unless: 1. The electrical system for such bicycle has been certified by an accredited testing laboratory for compliance with Underwriters Laboratories (UL) standard 2849, or such other safety standard as the department has established by rule in consultation with the fire department; and 2. Such certification or the logo, wordmark, or name of such accredited testing laboratory is displayed: (i) on packaging or documentation provided at the time of sale for such powered bicycle; or (ii) directly on such powered bicycle or the battery of such bicycle. b. No person shall distribute, sell, lease, rent, or offer for sale, lease, or rental, a powered mobility device unless: 1. The electrical system for such powered mobility device has been certified by an accredited testing laboratory for compliance with Underwriters Laboratories (UL) standard 2272, or such other safety standard as the department has established by rule in consultation with the fire department; and 2. Such certification or the logo, wordmark, or name of such accredited testing laboratory is displayed: (i) on packaging or documentation provided at the time of sale for such powered mobility device; or (ii) directly on such powered mobility device or the battery of such device. c. No person shall distribute, sell, lease, rent or offer for sale, lease or rental a storage battery for a powered bicycle or powered mobility device unless: 1. Such storage battery has been certified by an accredited testing laboratory for compliance with Underwriters Laboratories (UL) standard 2271, or such other safety standard as the department has established by rule in consultation with the fire department; and 2. Such certification, or the logo, wordmark, or name of such accredited testing laboratory is displayed: (i) on packaging or documentation provided at the time of sale for such storage battery; or (ii) directly on such storage battery. d. No powered bicycle or powered mobility device, or storage battery for a powered bicycle or powered mobility device, shall be required to display the certification or the logo, wordmark, or name of an accredited testing laboratory as required by subdivision a, b, or c of this section if such powered bicycle, powered mobility device, or storage battery: (i) is being sold or leased second-hand, or is being rented; and (ii) does not include packaging, or does not include printed documentation, at the time of distribution, sale, lease, rental or offer for sale, lease or rental, as applicable. e. No person shall distribute, sell, lease, rent or offer for sale, lease or rental a powered bicycle, powered mobility device, or storage battery for a powered bicycle or powered mobility device online unless the certification, or the logo, wordmark, or name of such accredited testing laboratory is displayed on the online product listing page. f. A person who violates this section, or any rule promulgated thereunder, is liable for a civil penalty as follows: 1. For the first violation, a civil penalty of zero dollars; and 2. For each subsequent violation of subdivision a, b or c of this section issued on a different day within two years of the date of a first violation, a civil penalty of not more than two thousand dollars; and 3. For each subsequent violation of subdivision e or h of this section issued on a different day within two years of the date of a first violation, a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars. g. Each failure to comply with this section with respect to any one stock keeping unit constitutes a separate violation. h. Records. Any person who distributes, sells, leases, rents, or offers to sell, lease or rent a powered bicycle, powered mobility device, or storage battery for a powered bicycle or powered mobility device shall maintain proof of certification that each such bicycle, device, or battery complies with under this section. All records required by this subdivision or by the commissioner by rule shall be maintained for three years and shall be made available to the department or the fire department electronically upon request, consistent with applicable law and in accordance with rules promulgated hereunder and with appropriate notice. i. The commissioner, or the fire commissioner, after providing notice and an opportunity to be heard, shall be authorized to order the sealing of any premises where any person has been found: 1. to have violated this section on at least three occasions within a three-year period; or 2. to have violated any rule promulgated pursuant to this section, on at least three occasions within a three-year period. j. Any authorized officer or employee of the department, or of the fire department, shall have the power to enforce this section or any rule promulgated pursuant to this section. Repealed. § 20-610.1 Fire safety; posting of information. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term “powered bicycle or powered mobility device business” means a business that sells, leases or rents powered bicycles or powered mobility devices, or batteries used by such bicycles and devices. b. The commissioner shall, in coordination with the fire department, develop informational materials regarding lithium-ion and other storage battery safety to be posted by powered bicycle or powered mobility device businesses. c. Powered bicycle or powered mobility device businesses shall conspicuously post such materials near the location where powered bicycles or powered mobility devices are offered for sale, lease or rent. d. Powered bicycle or powered mobility device businesses operating an online retail platform shall conspicuously post a hyperlink to such materials from each webpage where powered bicycles or powered mobility devices are offered for sale, lease or rent. e. The violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty of up to $150 for a first violation, up to $250 for a second violation, and up to $350 for a third or subsequent violation. Each day in which a violation continues constitutes a separate violation. Any authorized officer or employee of the department, or of the fire department, shall have the power to enforce this section or any rule promulgated pursuant to this section. f. The commissioner, in collaboration with relevant agencies, shall conduct culturally appropriate outreach in designated citywide languages, as defined in section 23-1101, to alert powered bicycle or powered mobility device businesses to the requirements of this section. Subchapter 3: Etching Acid § 20-611 Definitions. Whenever used in this subchapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Dealer of etching acid shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or company that engages in the business of dispensing etching acid. 2. Dispense shall mean to dispose of, give away, give, lease, loan, keep for sale, offer, offer for sale, sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of. 3. Etching acid shall have the same meaning set forth in subdivision e of section 10-117. 4. Personal information shall mean data pertaining to the purchaser of etching acid that may be used to identify such purchaser. Such information shall be limited to the purchaser's name, address, type of identification used in the purchase, identification number, if applicable, the date of purchase and amount of acid dispensed to the purchaser. 5. Purchasing records shall mean all written or electronically recorded personal information about a purchaser of etching acid gathered at the time of purchase by a dealer of etching acid as required by this subchapter. § 20-612 Requirements for purchase or sale. 1. Every dealer of etching acid shall request valid photo identification from each purchaser of etching acid at the time of such purchase and contemporaneously record in writing or electronically such purchaser's personal information. 2. No person shall purchase etching acid without first providing his or her personal information to the dealer of etching acid pursuant to this subchapter. It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this subdivision that the dealer failed to request personal information from the purchaser of etching acid. 3. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense etching acid to any person without recording such purchaser's personal information. § 20-613 Posting notice. Every dealer of etching acid shall conspicuously post at every table, desk or counter where orders are placed and/or payment is made a notice, the form and manner of which are to be provided by rule of the commissioner, indicating that all purchasers of etching acid shall be required to provide valid photo identification and their personal information and such information shall be recorded by the dealer of etching acid prior to purchase. § 20-614 Records of purchase. 1. Purchasing records shall be kept in a secure location and made available only to the commissioner and his or her designee, or a police officer, and shall be used solely for the purposes of enforcement of this subchapter and of state and local anti-graffiti laws and rules. 2. a. Purchasing records shall be kept by dealers of etching acid for one year. b. All purchasing records and any other information pertaining to the purchase or sale of etching acid shall be disposed of by the following methods only: i. shredding the records before the disposal of the records; or ii. destroying the personal information contained in the records; or iii. modifying the records to make the personal information unreadable; or iv. taking actions consistent with commonly accepted industry practices reasonably believed to ensure that no unauthorized person will have access to the personal information contained in the records. § 20-615 Rules. The commissioner may make and promulgate such rules and regulations as he or she may deem necessary for the proper implementation and enforcement of this subchapter. § 20-616 Penalties. 1. Any person who violates the provisions of this subchapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars and not more than two hundred fifty dollars. 2. Any person violating this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than one hundred dollars and not more than two hundred fifty dollars. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty pursuant to this subchapter shall be commenced by the service of a notice of hearing that shall be returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. 3. Any person who subsequently violates this subchapter within a period of one year of the date of the first violation shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine not less than five hundred dollars. Subchapter 3: Language Assistance Services in Pharmacies § 20-620 Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: a. Chain pharmacy shall mean any pharmacy that is part of a group of four or more establishments that (1) conduct business under the same business name or (2) operate under common ownership or management or pursuant to a franchise agreement with the same franchisor. b. Competent oral interpretation shall mean oral communication in which (1) a person acting as an interpreter comprehends a spoken message and re- expresses that message accurately in another language, utilizing all necessary pharmaceutical- and health-related terminology; (2) a bilingual pharmacy staff member communicates proficiently with an LEP individual in the LEP individual's primary language utilizing all necessary pharmaceutical- and health-related terminology; or (3) a person acting as an interpreter or a bilingual pharmacy staff member accurately translates a written document orally for an LEP individual utilizing all necessary pharmaceutical- and health-related terminology. c. Competent translation shall mean written communication in which a person or device translates a written message and re-writes that message accurately in another language. d. Language assistance services shall mean competent oral interpretation and/or competent translation provided to a limited English proficient individual in his or her primary language to ensure that such individual understands medication labels, warning labels and instructions for drug usage. e. Limited English proficient individual or LEP individual shall mean an individual who identifies as being, or is evidently, unable to speak, read or write English at a level that permits such individual to understand health- related and pharmaceutical information communicated in English. f. Other written material shall mean any written material other than a prescription label or warning label that the pharmacy considers vital to an LEP individual's safe and effective use of prescription medications. g. Pharmacy shall mean any retail establishment that is located within the city of New York in which prescription drugs are sold. h. Pharmacy primary languages shall mean the top seven languages spoken by LEP individuals in New York city, as determined biennially by the department of city planning based on data from the American Community Survey and made available to each chain pharmacy. i. Primary language shall mean the language identified by an LEP individual as the language to be used in communicating with such individual. § 20-621 Provision of interpretation services required. a. Every chain pharmacy shall provide free, competent oral interpretation services to each LEP individual filling a prescription at such chain pharmacy in the LEP individual's primary language for the purposes of counseling such individual about his or her prescription medications or when soliciting information necessary to maintain a patient medication profile, unless the LEP individual is offered and refuses such services. b. Every chain pharmacy shall provide free, competent oral interpretation of prescription medication labels, warning labels and other written material to each LEP individual filling a prescription at such chain pharmacy, unless the LEP individual is offered and refuses such services. c. The services required by this section may be provided by a staff member of the pharmacy or a third-party paid or volunteer contractor. Such services must be provided on an immediate basis but need not be provided in-person or face-to-face in order to meet the requirements of this section. § 20-622 Provision of translation services required. Every chain pharmacy shall provide free, competent translation of prescription medication labels, warning labels and other written material to each LEP individual filling a prescription at such chain pharmacy if that individual's primary language is one of the pharmacy primary languages, in addition to providing such labels and materials in English. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a chain pharmacy from providing dual- or multi-language medication labels, warning labels or other written materials to LEP individuals who speak one of the pharmacy primary languages if one of the languages included on such labels or sheets is the LEP individual's primary language. § 20-623 Notification relating to language assistance services. a. Every chain pharmacy shall conspicuously post, at or adjacent to each counter over which prescription drugs are sold, a notification of the right to free language assistance services for limited English proficient individuals as provided for in sections 20-621 and 20-622 of this subchapter. Such notifications shall be provided in all of the pharmacy's primary languages. The size, style and placement of such notice shall be determined in accordance with rules promulgated by the department. § 20-624 Penalties. a. Any chain pharmacy that violates the provisions of sections 20-621 or 20-622 of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to such sections shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars for the first violation and for each succeeding violation a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than five thousand dollars. b. Any chain pharmacy that violates the provisions of section 20-623 of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to such section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than two hundred dollars nor more than five hundred dollars for the first violation and for each succeeding violation a civil penalty of not less than three hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars. § 20-625 Hearing authority. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department shall be authorized upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for the violation of any provision of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder. The department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose civil penalties not to exceed the amounts specified in section 20-624 of this subchapter for each such violation. All proceedings authorized pursuant to this section shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. The penalties provided for in section 20-624 of this subchapter shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. b. All such proceedings shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. Subchapter 3-A: Amusement Devices, Arcades and Operators § 20-626 Definitions. Whenever used in this subchapter, the following terms shall mean: a. "Amusement device" means any contrivance, open to the public, that carries and conveys passengers along, around or over a fixed or restricted course or within a defined area for the purpose of amusing or entertaining its passengers, other than coin-operated amusement devices as defined in subdivision b of this section. b. "Player-operated amusement device" means any machine, contrivance, apparatus, booth or other device intended as a game that one or more persons are permitted to play by controlling the mechanical, electrical or electronic components that are needed to operate or manipulate the game in exchange for the payment of a fee, charge or thing of value, and that provides amusement, diversion or entertainment. This shall include, but not be limited to, fixed stand coin-operated rides as defined in subdivision j of section 19-136 of this code. c. "Amusement arcade" means any premises wherein there are located, in any combination, ten or more of the amusement devices and/or player-operated amusement devices defined in subdivisions a and b of this section. d. "Amusement operator" means any person who maintains or operates any amusement device, gaming cafe or amusement arcade as defined in subdivisions a, c and i of this section. e. "Amusement arcade or gaming cafe owner" means any person who owns or otherwise has legal possession or title to an amusement arcade as defined in subdivision c or a gaming cafe as defined in subdivision i of this section. f. "Amusement device owner" means any person who owns or otherwise has legal possession or title to an amusement device as defined in subdivision a of this section. g. "Portable amusement device" means an amusement device designed to be operated on the vehicle which is used to transport such device. h. "Gaming cafe" is a place where, for a fee charged directly or indirectly, persons are provided access to three or more computers or electronic devices in which game software has been installed by or for the owner or operator for the purpose of playing a game on the premises. § 20-627 Amusement devices. a. Requirements for amusement devices. (1) Every amusement device owner must purchase insurance or post cash or other security in an amount not less one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence or a bond in an amount not less than two million five hundred thousand dollars ($2,500,000) in the aggregate against liability for injury to persons arising out of the use of the amusement device. In addition, every amusement device owner must maintain in such owner's possession for display at the commissioner's request certificates of insurance for workers' compensation and disability coverage. (2) Every amusement device owner must ensure that all such amusement devices have undergone an inspection by the department of buildings, and that such amusement devices have passed an elevator and/or electrical control inspection, prior to the first instance of operation of any such amusement devices. (3) Every portable amusement device shall be equipped with a stairway on either or both sides thereof so that the stairway in use at any time for access to or egress from such portable amusement device shall at all times be within a reasonable distance from the sidewalk, such distance to be determined at the discretion of the commissioner. The operator of such portable amusement device shall not at any time permit any person to be admitted to the portable amusement device or to depart therefrom except by the stairway. (4) Notification of accidents. Every amusement operator shall provide notice to the department of any accident relating to an amusement device within twenty-four hours after the occurrence of such accident, or immediately after such accident if any person sustains an injury requiring medical treatment or dies as a result of such accident. The commissioner shall set by rule the form and content of such notice and the manner in which such notice shall be transmitted to the department. b. Amusement arcades and gaming cafes. (1) Each player-operated amusement device located within an amusement arcade or gaming cafe shall display a sign or signs, located and designed so as to be discernible by all players and prospective players, setting forth the rules of play, including the price of each game. (2) Where the amusement arcade or gaming cafe owner or the amusement operator in the amusement arcade or gaming cafe offers free games or prizes, signs shall be required to set out with clarity the number of wins or the score required to obtain a free game or prize; provided, however, that no amusement arcade or gaming cafe owner or amusement operator in the amusement arcade or gaming cafe shall offer money prizes or awards or such other prizes or awards which are redeemable or may be redeemed in money at the amusement arcade or gaming cafe or any other establishment, or which may be used as a credit or allowance or which may be exchanged for any money, credit or allowance. (3) No amusement arcade or gaming cafe owner or operator shall permit persons under the age of eighteen, unless such persons are otherwise exempt under New York State Education Law, to enter or remain in an amusement arcade or gaming cafe between the hours of nine a.m. through three p.m. on weekdays during the regularly scheduled school year for public schools. Such owners shall prominently display a sign stating that, unless exempt by New York State Education Law, persons under eighteen years of age are not to enter or remain on the premises at such times and that the truancy laws of the state of New York will be enforced. c. Placement and operation. No amusement device or player-operated amusement device or group of amusement devices and/or player-operated amusement devices shall be placed or operated in such a manner as to obstruct, or cause by the congregating of persons, an obstruction to, or interfere with, any public corridor or passageway, or to obstruct the entrance or exit to any premises. No amusement device or player-operated amusement device or group of amusement devices and/or player-operated amusement devices shall be placed on a public sidewalk in front of or adjacent to an amusement arcade or gaming cafe. Formerly 20-214. § 20-628 Gambling, gambling devices not authorized. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to authorize gambling or the use of gambling devices. Formerly  20-215. § 20-629 Location of player-operated amusement devices and prohibition on minors entering certain premises where located. a. No person shall locate a player-operated amusement device or a gaming cafe within two hundred feet of a public or a private elementary or secondary school. b. The provisions contained in subdivision a of this section shall not apply to fixed stand coin operated rides as defined in subdivision j of section 19-136 of this code. c. No person shall permit persons under the age of eighteen, unless such persons under the age of eighteen are otherwise exempt under New York State Education Law, to enter or remain, between the hours of nine a.m. through three p.m. on weekdays during the regularly scheduled school year for public schools, in a premises wherein there are located more than four and fewer than ten player-operated amusement devices. d. Premises wherein there are located more than four and fewer than ten player-operated amusement devices shall prominently display a sign stating that, unless exempt by New York State Education Law, persons under eighteen years of age are not to enter or remain on the premises between the hours of nine a.m. through three p.m. on weekdays during the regularly scheduled school year for public schools, and that the truancy laws of the state of New York will be enforced. e. Any person who violates the provisions of this section or any rules promulgated hereunder shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. In addition, the commissioner may, upon due notice, hold hearings to determine whether violations of the provisions of this section have occurred. Such notice shall contain a concise statement of the facts constituting the alleged violation and shall set forth the date, time and place of the hearing. Upon a finding of a violation of the provisions of this section, the commissioner shall be authorized to impose a civil penalty as provided in section 20-630 of this subchapter. Formerly 20-216. § 20-630 Penalties. a. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of: (i) one hundred seventy-five dollars for the first violation; (ii) three hundred dollars for the second violation; and (iii) five hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent violation; except that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of subdivision a or d of 20-629 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of subdivision a or d of section 20-629 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. b. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, a civil penalty of zero dollars shall be imposed for a first violation of subdivision c of section 20-629 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The notice of violation for such first-time violation shall inform the respondent of the provision of law or rule that the department believes the respondent has violated, describe the condition or activity that is the basis for the notice of violation, and advise the respondent that the law authorizes civil penalties for such violation and that subsequent violations may result in the imposition of such civil penalties. Any person who violates subdivision c of section 20-629 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred seventy-five dollars for a second violation and a civil penalty of three hundred dollars for a third or subsequent violation. c. Notwithstanding subdivision a of this section, any person who violates paragraph (4) of subdivision a of section 20-627 or any rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of five hundred dollars. Subchapter 3-B: Retail Laundries § 20-631 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Laundry. The term laundry means clothing, apparel, sheets, towels, linens and other fabrics that are intended for laundry services. Laundry operator. The term laundry operator means any person who operates a retail laundry. Laundry service. The term laundry service means washing, drying, starching or ironing laundry for a fee, and includes such services when they are provided along with or as an incident to the rental of clothing, apparel or other fabrics. The term laundry service does not include dry cleaning. Retail laundry. The term retail laundry means (i) a business that provides laundry services to the general public; (ii) a business that stores or collects laundry for laundry services or delivery for the general public; or (iii) a business that offers self-service laundry machinery for direct use by the general public. The term retail laundry does not include the laundry facilities of any hospital or the laundry facilities of any residential dwelling intended for use exclusively by the owners, tenants or occupants of such dwelling. a. Bills, tickets, cards, advertising or stationery issued or distributed by any laundry operator shall contain such laundry operator's name and address. b. Charges to laundry consumers shall state accurately and clearly the computation of the laundry charge. c. Each retail laundry where the general public may use self-service laundry machinery shall have on premises an attendant from 8:00 P.M. until closing or 6:00 A.M. the following day, whichever is earlier. d. Each vehicle used for retail laundry delivery shall display, in letters no less than two inches in height, the laundry operator's name, business address and business telephone number. § 20-633 Penalties. a. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of: (i) $175 for the first violation; (ii) $300 for the second violation; and (iii) $500 for the third and any subsequent violation committed; except that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of subdivision a or d of section 20-632 of this subchapter, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within 30 days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of subdivision a or d of section 20-632 of this subchapter, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination. b. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this section, there shall be a civil penalty of zero dollars imposed for a first violation of subdivision b of section 20-632 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The notice of violation for such first violation shall inform the respondent of the provision of law or rule that the department believes the respondent has violated, describe the condition or activity that is the basis for the notice of violation, and advise the respondent that the law authorizes civil penalties for such violation and that subsequent violations may result in the imposition of such civil penalties. Any person who violates subdivision b of section 20-632 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of $175 for a second violation and a civil penalty of $300 for a third or subsequent violation. § 20-634 Advisory Task Force. Repealed. § 20-635 Penalties. Repealed. Subchapter 4: Hamburgers and Chopped Meat. Repealed. § 20-667 Definitions. Repealed. § 20-668 Standard for hamburger. Repealed. § 20-669 Labeling of chopped meat. Repealed. § 20-670 Sale of meat ground upon request by customer. Repealed. § 20-671 Violations. Repealed. Subchapter 5: Sales of Petroleum Products § 20-672 Price displays. a. Except as provided in subdivision five of section one hundred ninety- two of the agriculture and markets law, it shall be unlawful for any person, in connection with the sale or offer for sale at retail of any petroleum products for use in motor vehicles or motor boats, to post or maintain at such place of sale any sign, placard or other display that states the price at which such petroleum products are sold or offered for sale, except as follows: 1. The price on such sign, placard or other display shall be stated by the unit of the measure at which such petroleum products are customarily sold at retail and shall include all applicable taxes; 2. The name, trade name, brand, mark or symbol, and grade or quality classification, if any, and method of processing of such petroleum products shall be clearly stated on such sign, placard or other display, and, if such petroleum products are sold without identification by name, trade name, brand, mark or symbol, such sign, placard or other display shall refer clearly to such petroleum products as unbranded; 3. In relation to the sale of gasoline for use in motor vehicles or motor boats, the price for the lowest grade of gasoline offered for sale shall be stated; and 4. Where the price for purchases made with cash or other specified form of payment is less than the price for purchases made with any other form of payment, such sign, poster, or placard shall state the price for each type of accepted payment. b. A retail dealer shall only sell petroleum products at the price stated on any sign, placard or other display subject to subdivision a of this section. It shall be unlawful to raise the price stated on any sign, placard or other display subject to subdivision a of this section for at least 24 hours. c. All numbers referring to price shall be the same height, width and thickness. Identification of the petroleum products offered for sale, and any non-numerical language distinguishing the prices charged for different forms of payment shall be in letters and numbers not less than one-half of the height, width and thickness of the numbers referring to price. Letters and numbers shall be black on a white background or displayed on an illuminated light- emitting diode sign. d. Price per gallon indicator. Except as otherwise provided in article sixteen of the agriculture and markets law or in any rule or regulations promulgated thereunder, every gasoline or diesel motor fuel dispensing device shall be equipped with a price per gallon indicator that shall correspond with the price per gallon stated on any sign, placard or other display subject to subdivision a of this section. e. Price indicator. Every gasoline or diesel motor fuel dispensing device shall be equipped with a total delivery indicator that shall record the correct price computed on the basis of the stated price per gallon and number of gallons delivered. f. Notwithstanding the foregoing, subdivisions a, b and c of this section shall not apply to the posting of information and labeling of dispensing devices with respect to the lead content of gasoline for motor vehicles, which shall be governed by the provisions of subdivision d and e of section 20-673.1 of this subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, and subdivisions a, b and c of this section shall not apply to the posting of information and labeling of dispensing devices with respect to the octane rating of gasoline for motor vehicles, which shall be governed by the provisions of subdivision d of section 20-673.2 of this subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder. g. Every gasoline or diesel motor fuel dispensing device that is not in proper working order shall be marked with a sign, placard or other display according to specifications that the commissioner shall set by rule. § 20-672.1 Sales record keeping requirements. a. Every retail dealer of petroleum products shall maintain a daily sales record of all petroleum products for which prices are required to be posted as provided in section 20-672. Such records shall document the total volume of each such type of product sold each day, the unit price and the total daily amount of sales for each such type of product, and the date and time when a change to the price posting specified in section 20-672 was made. b. All records required to be maintained shall be preserved in a manner that ensures their security and accessibility for inspection by the department for a period of one year. c. All records required to be maintained shall be kept in chronological order, either in writing or electronically, and shall be available for inspection by the department as follows: 1. Records maintained in writing shall be retained at the premises where sales are made for each of the immediately preceding thirty days. Such records shall be made available on demand to the department at such premises. The records required to be kept for the period beyond the immediately preceding thirty days shall be presented at the offices of the department within five business days after demand to produce them has been served on a retail dealer. 2. Records maintained electronically shall be retained on the premises in a manner that displays the data for the entire period for which the electronic data system retains such data to permit an inspector to view it on demand on the device, and if such period is for less than the immediately preceding thirty days, then the data must be provided on demand in a chronologically ordered print-out for the full thirty days. A complete and accurate print out of the electronically maintained records that are required to be kept for the period beyond the immediately preceding thirty days shall be presented at the offices of the department within five business days after demand to produce them has been served on a retail dealer. § 20-673 Fraudulent practices prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale gasoline or other petroleum products for use in motor vehicles or motor boats in any manner so as to deceive or tend to deceive the purchaser as to the price, nature, quality or identity thereof; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the prohibition of deceptive practices involving the representation of gasoline for motor vehicles as unleaded, which shall be governed by the provisions of section 20-673.1 of this subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, and provided, further, that this section shall not apply to the prohibition of deceptive practices involving the certification, display or representation of the octane rating of gasoline for motor vehicles, which shall be governed by the provisions of section 20-673.2 of this subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale from any pump, dispensing devices or container any gasoline or other petroleum products other than gasoline or other petroleum products manufactured or distributed by the manufacturer or distributor marketing such gasoline or other petroleum products under the name, trade name, brand, symbol or mark affixed to or contained on such pump, dispensing device or container, or to substitute, mix or adulterate gasoline or other petroleum products sold or offered for sale under a name, trade name, brand, symbol or mark. § 20-673.1 Sale of unleaded gasoline. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Distributor shall mean any person who transports or stores or causes the transportation or storage of gasoline at any point between any plant at which gasoline is produced and any retail outlet or facility of a wholesale purchaser-consumer. 2. Gasoline shall mean any fuel sold for use in motor vehicles and motor vehicle engines, and commonly or commercially known or sold as gasoline. 3. Lead additive shall mean any substance containing lead or lead compounds. 4. Leaded gasoline shall mean gasoline which is produced with the use of any lead additive or which contains more than five one hundredths of a gram of lead per gallon or more than five one thousandths of a gram of phosphorus per gallon. 5. Refiner shall mean any person who owns, leases, operates, controls or supervises a plant at which gasoline is produced. 6. Reseller shall mean any person who purchases gasoline identified by the corporate, trade or brand name of a refiner from such refiner or a distributor and resells or transfers it to retailers or wholesale purchaser- consumers displaying the refiner's brand, and whose assets or facilities are not substantially owned, leased or controlled by such refiner. 7. Retail outlet shall mean any establishment at which gasoline is sold or offered for sale for use in motor vehicles. 8. Retailer shall mean any person who owns, leases, operates, controls, or supervises a retail outlet. 9. Unleaded gasoline shall mean gasoline which is produced without the use of any lead additive and which contains not more than five one hundredths of a gram of lead per gallon and not more than five one thousandths of a gram of phosphorus per gallon. 10. Wholesale purchaser-consumer shall mean any organization that is an ultimate consumer of gasoline and which purchases or obtains gasoline from a supplier for use in motor vehicles and receives delivery of that product into a storage tank of at least five hundred fifty gallon capacity substantially under the control of that organization. b. No distributor shall sell or transfer to any other distributor, retailer or wholesale purchaser-consumer any gasoline which is represented to be unleaded unless such gasoline meets the defined requirements for unleaded gasoline set forth in subdivision a of this section. c. No retailer or employee or agent of a retailer, and no wholesale purchaser-consumer or employee or agent of a wholesale purchaser-consumer, shall sell, dispense or offer for sale gasoline represented to be unleaded unless such gasoline meets the defined requirements for unleaded gasoline set forth in subdivision a of this section. d. Every retailer and wholesale purchaser-consumer shall affix to each gasoline pump stand in a location so as to be readily visible to the employees of such retailer or wholesale purchaser-consumer and to persons operating motor vehicles into which gasoline is to be dispensed a permanent legible label as follows: (i) for gasoline pump stands containing pumps for introduction of unleaded gasoline into motor vehicles, the label shall state: Unleaded gasoline; and (ii) for gasoline pump stands containing pumps for introduction of leaded gasoline into motor vehicles, the label shall state: Contains lead anti-knock compounds; provided, however, that where more than one grade of unleaded gasoline is offered for sale at a retail outlet, compliance with this subdivision is required for only one grade. e. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, in any proceeding to adjudicate a violation of subdivision d of this section, a retailer or wholesale purchaser-consumer may be found not to be liable for violation thereof where it is shown that more than one grade of gasoline is dispensed from a gasoline pump or pump stand and it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the commissioner that an alternative system of labeling furthers the objectives of such subdivision. f. Any violation of subdivision c of this section by a retailer or wholesale purchaser-consumer shall also be deemed a violation by: (1) the reseller, if any, and the refiner, where the corporate, trade or brand name of such refiner or any of its marketing subsidiaries appears on the pump stand or is displayed at the retail outlet or wholesale purchaser- consumer facility from which the gasoline was sold, dispensed or offered for sale. Except as provided in subdivision g of this section, the refiner shall be deemed in violation of subdivision c of this section irrespective of whether any other refiner, distributor, retailer or wholesale purchaser-consumer may have caused or permitted the violation; or (2) the distributor who sold such retailer or wholesale purchaser- consumer gasoline contained in the storage tank which supplied the pump from which the gasoline was sold, dispensed or offered for sale which gave rise to the violation, where the corporate, trade or brand name of a refiner or any of its marketing subsidiaries does not appear on the pump stand and is not displayed at the retail outlet or wholesale purchaser-consumer facility from which the gasoline was sold, dispensed or offered for sale. g. (1) In any case in which a retailer or wholesale purchaser-consumer and any refiner or distributor would be in violation or be deemed in violation of subdivision c of this section, the retailer or wholesale purchaser-consumer shall not be liable if he or she can demonstrate that the violation was not caused by such retailer or wholesale purchaser-consumer or his or her employee or agent. (2) In any case in which a retailer or wholesale purchaser-consumer would be in violation of subdivision c of this section, and a reseller, if any, and any refiner would be deemed in violation under paragraph one of subdivision f of this section, the refiner shall not be deemed in violation if he or she can demonstrate: (a) that the violation was not caused by such refiner or his or her employee or agent, and (b) that the violation was caused by an act in violation of any law, other than the provisions of this section, or an act of sabotage, vandalism, or deliberate commingling of leaded and unleaded gasoline, whether or not such acts are violations of law in the jurisdiction where the violation of the requirements of this section occurred, or (c) that the violation was caused by the action of a reseller or a retailer supplied by such reseller, in violation of a contractual undertaking imposed by the refiner on such reseller designed to prevent such action, and despite reasonable efforts by the refiner to insure compliance with such contractual obligation, such as periodic sampling, or (d) that the violation was caused by the action of a retailer who is supplied directly by the refiner and not by a reseller, in violation of a contractual undertaking imposed by the refiner on such retailer designed to prevent such action, and despite reasonable efforts by the refiner to insure compliance with such contractual obligation, such as periodic sampling, or (e) that the violation was caused by the action of a distributor subject to a contract with the refiner for transportation of gasoline from a terminal to a distributor, retailer or wholesale purchaser-consumer, in violation of a contractual undertaking imposed by the refiner on such distributor designed to prevent such action, and despite reasonable efforts by the refiner to insure compliance with such contractual obligation, such as periodic sampling, or (f) that the violation was caused by a distributor (such as a common carrier) not subject to a contract with the refiner but engaged by him or her for transportation of gasoline from a terminal to a distributor, retailer or wholesale purchaser-consumer, despite reasonable efforts by the refiner to prevent such action, such as specification or inspection of equipment, or (g) that the violation occurred at a wholesale purchaser-consumer facility; provided, however, that if such wholesale purchaser-consumer was supplied by a reseller, the refiner must demonstrate that the violation could not have been prevented by such reseller's compliance with a contractual undertaking imposed by the refiner on such reseller as provided in subparagraph c of this paragraph. (h) For purposes of subparagraphs (b) through (f) of this paragraph, the term was caused means that the refiner must demonstrate by reasonably specific showings by direct or circumstantial evidence that the violation was caused or must have been caused by another. (3) In any case in which a retailer or wholesale purchaser-consumer would be in violation of subdivision c of this section, and a reseller and any refiner would be deemed in violation under paragraph one of subdivision f of this section, the reseller shall not be deemed in violation if he or she can demonstrate that the violation was not caused by such reseller or his or her employee or agent. (4) In any case in which a retailer or wholesale purchaser-consumer would be in violation of subdivision c of this section, and any distributor would be deemed in violation under paragraph two of subdivision f of this section, the distributor will not be deemed in violation if he or she can demonstrate that the violation was not caused by such distributor or his or her employee or agent. § 20-673.2 Certification, display and representation of octane rating. a. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Gasoline shall mean gasoline of a type distributed for use as a fuel in any motor vehicle. 2. Distributor shall mean any person who receives gasoline and distributes such gasoline to another person other than the ultimate purchaser. 3. Retailer shall mean any person who markets gasoline to the general public for ultimate consumption. 4. Knock shall mean the combustion of a fuel spontaneously in localized areas of a cylinder of a spark-ignition engine, instead of the combustion of such fuel progressing from the spark. 5. Octane rating shall mean the rating of the anti-knock characteristics of a grade or type of gasoline as determined by dividing by two the sum of the research octane number plus the motor octane number, unless another procedure is prescribed under paragraph three of 15 U.S.C. § 2823(c), in which case such term shall mean the rating of such characteristics as determined under the procedure so prescribed. 6. Refiner shall mean any person engaged in the refining of crude oil to produce gasoline or the importation of gasoline. 7. Research octane number and motor octane number shall have the meaning given such terms in the specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) entitled Standard Specifications for Automotive Gasoline designated D 439 and, with respect to any grade or type of gasoline, are determined in accordance with test methods set forth in ASTM standard test methods designated D 2699 and D 2700, or such other meaning given such terms in any regulations promulgated by the federal trade commission pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 2823. 8. Ultimate purchaser shall mean, with respect to any item, the first person who purchases such item for purposes other than resale. b. Each refiner who distributes gasoline shall: (1) determine the octane rating of any such gasoline; and (2) if such refiner distributes such gasoline to any person other than the ultimate purchaser, certify, consistent with the determination made under paragraph one of this subdivision, the octane rating of such gasoline. c. Each distributor who receives gasoline, the octane rating of which is certified to the distributor under this section, and distributes such gasoline to another person other than the ultimate purchaser shall certify to such other person the octane rating of such gasoline consistent with: (1) the octane rating of such gasoline certified to such distributor; or (2) if such distributor elects, in accordance with the regulations of the federal trade commission, the octane rating of such gasoline determined by such distributor. d. Each retailer shall display at the point of sale to ultimate purchasers of gasoline, the octane rating of such gasoline, in accordance with the posting requirements and label specifications to be prescribed by the commissioner by regulation. Such octane rating shall be consistent with: (1) the octane rating of such gasoline certified to such retailer under paragraph two of subdivision b of this section or under subdivision c of this section; (2) if such retailer elects, in accordance with the regulations of the federal trade commission, the octane rating of such gasoline determined by such retailer for such gasoline; or (3) if such retailer is a refiner, the octane rating of such gasoline determined under paragraph one of subdivision b of this section. e. No person who distributes gasoline may make any representation respecting the anti-knock characteristics of such gasoline unless such representation fairly discloses the octane rating of such gasoline consistent with such gasoline's octane rating as certified to, or determined by, such person under the foregoing subdivisions of this section. f. For purposes of this section, the octane rating of any gasoline shall be considered to be certified, displayed or represented by any person consistent with the rating certified to, or determined by, such person: (1) in the case of gasoline which consists of a blend of two or more quantities of gasoline of differing octane ratings, only if the rating certified, displayed or represented by such person is the average of the octane ratings of such quantities, weighted by volume; or (2) in the case of gasoline which does not consist of such a blend, only if the octane rating such person certifies, displays or represents is the same as the octane rating of such gasoline certified to, or determined by, such person. § 20-673.3 Inspection, investigation; recordkeeping. a. The commissioner or the commissioner's designee, upon presentation of appropriate credentials, shall be authorized to enter upon or through the business premises of any person who sells or offers for sale gasoline or other petroleum products for use in motor vehicles or motor boats or any place where such gasoline or petroleum products is stored, for the purposes of making inspections, taking samples and conducting tests to determine compliance with the provisions of this subchapter or any rules or regulation promulgated hereunder. b. Whenever the commissioner has reason to believe that a violation of this subchapter or any rule or regulation has occurred, he or she shall be authorized to make such investigation as he or she shall deem necessary, and to the extent necessary for this purpose, he or she may examine any person and may compel the production of all relevant records. c. Any person subject to the provisions of this subchapter shall maintain such written records as the commissioner may prescribe by regulation. § 20-674 Violations. a. (1) Any person who violates the provisions of this subchapter or any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, other than sections 20-673.1 and 20-673.2 and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than ten thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (2) Any person who violates the provisions of this subchapter or any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, other than sections 20-673.1 and 20-673.2 and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, who has been found guilty of a violation of any such sections or such rules or regulations two times within the preceding twenty-four month period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars nor more than fifteen thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (3) In addition to the penalties prescribed by paragraph one of subdivision a of this section, any person who violates the provisions of this subchapter or any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, other than sections 20-673.1 and 20-673.2 and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than ten thousand dollars; except that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of section 20-672 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-672 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. (4) In addition to the penalties prescribed by paragraph two of subdivision a of this section, any person who violates the provisions of this subchapter or any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, other than sections 20-673.1 and 20-673.2 and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, who has been found guilty of a violation of any such sections or such rules or regulations two times within the preceding twenty-four month period shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than one thousand dollars nor more than fifteen thousand dollars. b. Any person who violates the provisions of section 20-673.1 of this subchapter or any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than ten thousand dollars. c. (1) If, after providing due notice and an opportunity to be heard, the commissioner finds that a person has violated any of the provisions of section 20-673.2 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, he or she shall be authorized to issue and serve upon such person an order requiring such person to cease and desist from engaging in the prohibited activity. Such order shall become final (i) upon the expiration of the time allowed for filing any administrative appeal which may be available and for commencing a proceeding pursuant to article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules or (ii) upon the exhaustion of all appeals arising out of the proceedings described in item (i) of this paragraph. Any person who violates an order of the commissioner issued hereunder after it has become final shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than ten thousand dollars for each violation. (2) Any person who violates the provisions of section 20-673.2 of this subchapter or any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder with actual knowledge or knowledge fairly implied on the basis of objective circumstances that the act or practice underlying the violation is unfair or deceptive shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than ten thousand dollars; provided, however, that in order for any retailer to be held liable under this paragraph for violating any of the provisions of subdivisions d or e of such section 20-673.2, such retailer shall be shown to have had actual knowledge that the act or practice underlying the violation is unfair or deceptive. In determining the amount of any civil penalty imposed under this paragraph, the following shall be considered: the degree of culpability; any history of prior such conduct; ability to pay; effect on ability to continue to do business; and such other matters as justice may require. d. In the case of a violation through continuing failure to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter, any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, or any order of the commissioner issued pursuant to subdivision c of this section, each day of the continuance of such failure shall be treated as a separate violation. e. The civil penalties prescribed by the provisions of this section may be imposed by the commissioner after due notice and an opportunity to be heard have been provided or may be recovered in a civil action in the name of the city, commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. In any civil action commenced to recover civil penalties for violation of a final order of the commissioner issued pursuant to subdivision c of this section, the supreme court of New York is empowered to grant such injunctive or equitable relief as the court deems appropriate in the enforcement of such final order. f. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the commissioner shall cause to be published in the City Record once each month the name and business location of any person, firm or corporation that has been found to have violated any provision of sections 20-673.1 or 20-673.2 during the month immediately preceding. § 20-675 Rules and regulations. The commissioner shall have the authority to promulgate such rules and regulations as the commissioner shall deem necessary to effectuate the purpose of this subchapter, including but not limited to the size, the composition, the type size to be used for lettering, and the placement of signs which are provided for in section 20-672 of this subchapter. Subchapter 6: Sale of Meats Repealed. § 20-676 Definitions. Repealed. § 20-677 Sales at retail. Repealed. § 20-678 Sales at wholesale. Repealed. § 20-679 Injection devices. Repealed. § 20-680 Labeling of pickled, pumped and cured meats and meat products. Repealed. § 20-681 Punishment. Repealed. Subchapter 7: Sale of Prepackaged Meat § 20-682 Sales of prepackaged meats. a. It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, or supervisor of a retail store or any independently operated department within, to sell or offer or expose for sale, at retail any prepackaged unprocessed or untreated fresh or frozen meat unless at least one of the sides with the greatest surface area of the package is colorless and transparent, exclusive of labeling; which labeling shall not occupy more than ten percent of that side of the package, or six and one quarter (6.25) square inches, whichever is greater. This section shall be applicable solely in those cases where the packaging is performed on the premises of the sale. This section shall not apply to the sale of ground meat. b. A sign shall be posted at the point of display of any prepackaged unprocessed or untreated fresh or frozen meat, the packaging of which is colorless and transparent on only one side in accordance with the provisions of subdivision a of this section, stating that the retailer shall accept the return of such prepackaged meat found to be unsatisfactory upon the request of a consumer who provides proof of purchase and further stating that the retailer shall either refund the full purchase price or provide a satisfactory replacement for such purchase. The size and wording of such sign shall be determined by rule of the commissioner. § 20-683 Punishment. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be liable to forfeit and pay a civil penalty in the sum of three hundred dollars for the first violation, four hundred dollars for the second violation and five hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent violation; except that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of subdivision b of section 20-682 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of subdivision b of section 20-682 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. Subchapter 8: Perishable Foods § 20-684 Legislative intent. The council finds that consumers cannot be certain that food offered for sale is fresh or that it will remain fresh for a reasonable period of time after it is purchased. The council particularly recognizes consumer concern with the freshness of foods including, but not limited to, meat, poultry, fish, dairy products, eggs, fruit, vegetables and baked goods. The council further finds that the food industry's practice of controlling food freshness through coded dates has proven inadequate for protection of the public. The council has concluded that a mandatory system of clear and legible dating accompanied by a statement of recommended conditions of storage is the best way to assure consumers of the freshness of the foods that they buy in stores. § 20-685 Perishable foods. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any perishable food designated by the commissioner in accordance with section 20-686 hereof unless there is stamped, printed or otherwise plainly and conspicuously marked on the top cover or principal panel of its container or any label affixed thereto the statements indicating recommended conditions and methods of storage, and the fact that it is not to be sold after a clearly specified date for human consumption as food. § 20-686 Regulations. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations designating those perishable foods which shall come within the scope of section 20-685 of this subchapter wherever the commissioner shall find that because of the nature of the commodity, the mode of packaging or other consideration, such information about the commodity shall be necessary and proper to provide adequate information to the consumer as to the perishable nature of such commodity and conditions of storage. § 20-687 Powers of the commissioner. (a) The commissioner shall receive and evaluate complaints and initiate his or her own investigations relating to these matters and take appropriate action related thereto including stop-sale and stop-removal orders where necessary and proper. (b) The commissioner shall have the power after reasonable notice and hearing, to determine the reasonableness of any statement or representation as to the date and conditions of storage affixed pursuant to section 20-685 of this subchapter. § 20-688 Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or association or agent or employee thereof, who shall violate any of the provisions of this subchapter or of the regulations promulgated pursuant to section 20-686 shall pay a civil penalty of zero dollars for the first violation, not more than one hundred seventy-five dollars for the second violation and not more than two hundred twenty-five dollars for the third and any subsequent violation; and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five nor more than two hundred fifty dollars for each such violation. Subchapter 9: Water Saving Plumbing Fixtures. Repealed. § 20-689 Water saving plumbing fixtures. Repealed. § 20-690 Punishment. Repealed. Subchapter 9: Price Displays1 Publication of endangered and threatened species list. No later than April 1, 2005, and at least annually thereafter, the commissioner shall publish a list using the department's website for the purpose of ensuring compliance by merchants with the provisions of this subchapter. Such list shall include guidance regarding the identification of any fish or wildlife family, genus, species, subspecies or population designated by or pursuant to New York law as endangered or threatened and shall also separately specify whether all populations of any family or genus so identified are designated as endangered or threatened by or pursuant to New York law. Such list shall be published in English and Chinese. § 20-699.2 Penalties. Any person that violates any provision of section 20-699 after October 1, 2005 shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars for the first violation and each additional violation occurring on the same day as the first violation, and not less than five hundred dollars nor more than one thousand five hundred dollars for each subsequent violation occurring within a period of twenty-four months. § 20-699.3 Seizure and forfeiture. Any product, item, substance, or species bought or sold, or attempted to be bought or sold, after October 1, 2005 in violation of section 20-699 or any regulation issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to forfeiture upon notice and judicial determination. § 20-699.4 Rules. The commissioner shall have the authority to promulgate such rules and regulations as the commissioner shall deem necessary to implement the provisions of this subchapter. § 20-699.5 Enforcement. The commissioner and the members of the police department shall have the authority to enforce this subchapter. § 20-699.6 Hearing authority. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department shall be authorized, after October 1, 2005, upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for the violation of any provision of this subchapter. The department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose civil penalties not to exceed the amounts specified in section 20-699.2 of this subchapter for each such violation. All proceedings authorized pursuant to this subdivision shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. The remedies and penalties provided for in this subdivision shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. (2) All such proceedings shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. In addition to serving the notice on the person being charged, where written authorization is filed with the department, the department shall deliver by first class mail a copy of the notice to the corporate headquarters or wholesale supplier of such person. Subchapter 13: Motion Picture Theaters § 20-699.7 Open captioning in motion picture theaters. a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: Motion picture. The term motion picture means a story or event recorded by a camera as a set of moving images. Motion picture theater. The term motion picture theater means an entity in the business of providing showings of motion pictures to the general public. Open motion picture captioning. The term open motion picture captioning means the written, on-screen display of a motion picture's dialogue and non- speech information, including music, the identity of the character who is speaking, and other sounds and sound effects. Peak motion picture attendance hours. The term peak motion picture attendance hours means the hours between 5:59 p.m. and 11:01 p.m. on Friday and the hours between 11:29 a.m. and 11:01 p.m. on Saturday or Sunday. b. Open motion picture captioning required. A motion picture theater that offers more than 10 motion picture showings per week shall provide scheduled showings of motion pictures with open motion picture captioning such that at least one quarter of all showings of a motion picture with four or more showings during a one-week time period shall have open motion picture captioning, except that no more than four open captioning showings of a single motion picture shall be required in a one-week time period. c. Exceptions. A motion picture that is produced and distributed without open motion picture captioning is not subject to the provisions of subdivision b of this section. d. Timing. 1. At least half of the scheduled showings required pursuant to subdivision b of this section shall begin and end within peak motion picture attendance hours, unless fewer than 1 in 8 showings of a motion picture is screened during peak motion picture attendance hours, in which case this requirement is met if all screenings of such motion picture during peak motion picture attendance hours have open motion picture captioning. 2. At least half of the scheduled showings required pursuant to subdivision b of this section that are scheduled outside of peak motion picture attendance hours shall start after 5:59 p.m. and finish before 11:01 p.m. on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays or Thursdays, unless fewer than 1 in 8 showings of a motion picture is screened after 5:59 p.m. on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays or Thursdays, in which case this requirement is met if all screenings of such motion picture during such times have open motion picture captioning. 3. No showing of a motion picture with open motion picture captioning that overlaps with another showing of a motion picture with open motion picture captioning shall be counted toward the minimum number of showings required by this section except where it is not practicable to avoid such overlap. 4. Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent a motion picture theater from showing more motion pictures with open captioning than required by subdivision b of this section. e. Public notice. A motion picture theater subject to the provisions of subdivision b of this section shall advertise the date and time of motion picture showings required by subdivision b in the same manner as the motion picture theater advertises all other motion picture showings and shall indicate which showings will include open motion picture captioning. f. Records. Every motion picture theater shall maintain documents sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this subchapter for a period of at least three years. g. Violations. Any motion picture theater that violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each violation. Subchapter 14: Space Heaters § 20-699.10 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Electric space heater. The term electric space heater means any electric portable device designed for space heating. Stock keeping unit. The term stock keeping unit means each group of items offered for sale of the same brand name, quantity of contents, retail price and variety. § 20-699.11 Sale of electric space heaters. a. No person shall distribute, sell or offer for sale an electric space heater unless such electric space heater: 1. Is equipped with a thermostat and such thermostat is disclosed on packaging for such space heater; 2. Is equipped with an automatic function that disables such space heater upon overheating or tipping over and such automatic function is disclosed on packaging for such space heater; 3. Has been listed and labeled by a nationally recognized testing laboratory or other approved organization, as required by section 605.10.1 of the New York city fire code and such labeling is disclosed on packaging for such space heater. b. Penalty. A person who violates subdivision a of this section or any rule promulgated thereunder is liable for a civil penalty as follows: 1. For the first violation, a civil penalty of zero dollars; and 2. For any subsequent violations issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of a first violation, a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars. c. Each failure to comply with subdivision a of this section with respect to any one stock keeping unit constitutes a separate violation. Subchapter 15: Rental Real Estate Agreements § 20-699.20 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Agent. The term “agent” means a person who is licensed as a real estate broker or real estate salesperson under section 440-a of the real property law and is acting in a fiduciary capacity. Dual agent. The term “dual agent” means an agent who is acting as a tenant’s agent and a landlord’s agent with respect to an agreement regarding the same residential real property. Engage. The term “engage” means to enter into an agreement that requires the payment of a fee by a person for the performance of services by another person. Fee. The term “fee” means an amount of money that is charged by a person for the provision of services to one or more persons, including but not limited to a commission. Landlord. The term “landlord” means the lessor in a residential real property agreement, and includes an owner who lists residential real property for lease with an agent, whether or not a lease results, or who receives an offer to rent residential real property, except for a cooperative housing corporation leasing residential real property to a dwelling unit owner or shareholder of such cooperative housing corporation. Landlord’s agent. The term “landlord’s agent” means a listing agent who acts alone, or an agent who acts in cooperation with a listing agent, acts as a landlord’ Lease. The term “lease” means an agreement by which a landlord conveys residential real property for a specified term and for a specified rent. Listing. The term “listing” means an advertisement or written notice conveying that a property is available for lease. Listing agent. The term “listing agent” means a person who has entered into a listing agreement to act as an agent of the landlord for compensation. Listing agreement. The term “listing agreement” means an agreement between an owner of residential real property and an agent, by which the agent has been authorized to lease the residential real property or to find or obtain a lessee therefor. Residential real property. The term “residential real property” means a dwelling unit, as defined in paragraph 13 of subdivision a of section 27-2004, including a dwelling unit held in the condominium or cooperative forms of ownership. Tenant. The term “tenant” means a lessee in an agreement to rent residential real property and includes a person who executes an offer to rent residential real property from a landlord through an agent, or who has engaged the services of an agent with the object of entering into a residential real property agreement as a lessee. Tenant’s agent. The term “tenant’s agent” means an agent who agrees to locate residential real property for a tenant or who finds a tenant for a property and presents an offer to lease to the landlord or landlord’s agent and negotiates on behalf of the tenant. § 20-699.21 Payment of certain fees imposed in relation to the rental of residential real property. a. Except as expressly provided by subdivision 1 of section 238-a of the real property law: 1. a landlord’s agent shall not impose any fee on, or collect any fee from, a tenant related to the rental of residential real property; and 2. any agent who publishes a listing for a rental of residential real property with the permission or authorization of the landlord for such property shall not impose any fee on, or collect any fee from, a tenant related to the rental of such property. b. A landlord is in violation of subdivision a of this section if: 1. a landlord’s agent of such landlord violates such subdivision; or 2. any agent who publishes a listing for a rental of residential real property with the permission or authorization of such landlord violates such subdivision. c. No person shall condition the rental of residential real property on a tenant engaging any agent, including but not limited to a dual agent. d. No person shall post a listing for the rental of residential real property that represents that fees must be paid in a manner that would violate this section. e. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that an agent who publishes a listing for a rental of residential real property does so with the permission or authorization of the landlord of such property. § 20-699.22 Total fee disclosure. a. Every listing related to the rental of residential real property shall disclose in such listing in a clear and conspicuous manner any fee to be paid by the prospective tenant for the rental of such property. b. Prior to the execution of an agreement for the rental of residential real property, the landlord or landlord’s agent shall provide to the tenant an itemized written disclosure of any fees that the tenant must pay to the landlord or to any other person at the direction of the landlord in connection with such rental. Such itemized written disclosure shall include a short description of each fee, and the tenant shall sign any such itemized written disclosure prior to signing an agreement for the rental of such residential real property. The landlord or landlord’s agent shall retain the signed written disclosure required by this subdivision for 3 years and shall provide a copy of such signed written disclosure to the tenant. § 20-699.23 Penalties. a. Any person who violates the provisions of section 20-699.21 shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for the first violation and not more than $2,000 for each subsequent violation occurring within a two-year period. b. Any person who violates the provisions of section 20-699.22 shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $500 for the first violation and not more than $1,000 for each subsequent violation occurring within a two-year period. c. In a proceeding alleging a violation of this subchapter, the department may seek an order imposing all applicable civil penalties authorized pursuant to this section and requiring restitution of any fees charged in violation of this subchapter. § 20-699.24 Private cause of action. Any person alleging a violation of this subchapter may bring a civil action, in accordance with applicable law, in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such court may order compensatory, injunctive and declaratory relief. § 20-699.25 Outreach and education. a. The commissioner shall establish an outreach and education campaign about the provisions of this subchapter. Such outreach and education shall be provided to real estate brokers, tenants, prospective tenants and members of the public who are likely to be affected by this law. b. The materials required by this section shall be made available on the department’s website in English and the designated citywide languages as provided in section 23-1101. Chapter 5: Unfair Trade Practices Subchapter 1: Consumer Protection Law § 20-700 Unfair trade practices prohibited. No person shall engage in any deceptive or unconscionable trade practice in the sale, lease, rental or loan or in the offering for sale, lease, rental, or loan of any consumer goods or services, or in the collection of consumer debts. § 20-701 Definitions. a. Deceptive trade practice. Any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral, written, digital, or electronic statement, visual description or other representation or omission of any kind made in connection with the sale, lease, rental, or loan or in connection with the offering for sale, lease, rental, or loan of consumer goods or services, or in the extension of consumer credit or in the collection of consumer debts, which has the capacity, tendency or effect of directly or indirectly deceiving or misleading consumers. Deceptive trade practices include but are not limited to: (1) representations that goods or services have sponsorship, approval, certification, accessories, characteristics, ingredients, uses, benefits, or quantities that they do not have; the supplier has a sponsorship, approval, status, affiliation, or connection that he or she does not have; goods are original or new if they are deteriorated, altered, damaged, refurbished, reconditioned, reclaimed, or secondhand; or, goods or services are of a particular standard, quality, grade, style, or model, if they are of another; (2) the use, in any representation, of exaggeration, innuendo, or ambiguity as to a material fact, or the failure to state a material fact, if such use of, or failure to state, a material fact deceives or tends to deceive; (3) disparaging the goods, services, or business of another by false or misleading representations or omissions of material facts; (4) offering goods or services with intent not to sell them as offered, including by failing to disclose clearly and conspicuously all material exclusions, reservations, limitations, modifications, or conditions on such offer; (5) offering goods or services with intent not to supply reasonable expectable public demand, unless the offer discloses a limitation of quantity; (6) making false or misleading representations of fact, or omitting material facts, concerning the reasons for, existence of, or amounts of price reductions, or price in comparison to prices of competitors or one's own price at a past or future time; (7) stating that a consumer transaction involves consumer rights, remedies, or obligations that it does not involve; (8) falsely stating that services, replacements or repairs are or are not needed; (9) falsely stating the reasons for offering or supplying goods or services at scale discount prices; and (10) failing to provide a complete and accurate translation of all documents, other than receipts, related to a consumer transaction conducted in a designated citywide language other than English, as defined in section 23-1101, provided that such transaction was predominantly negotiated in such language, and provided further that, for purposes of this subdivision, the term predominantly negotiated means the negotiation of material terms of a consumer transaction, including price, quantity, the description of goods or services, exclusions and conditions; and the term receipt means a document that provides only the amount paid by the consumer for each item, the total amount paid by such consumer, the date of the purchase and the legal name and address of the seller. b. Unconscionable trade practice. Any act or practice in connection with the sale, lease, rental or loan or in connection with the offering for sale, lease, rental or loan of any consumer goods or services, or in the extension of consumer credit, or in the collection of consumer debts which unfairly takes advantage of the lack of knowledge, ability, experience or capacity of a consumer; or results in a gross disparity between the value received by a consumer and the price paid, to the consumer's detriment; provided that no act or practice shall be deemed unconscionable under this subchapter unless declared unconscionable and described with reasonable particularity in a local law, or in a rule or regulation promulgated by the commissioner. In promulgating such rules and regulations the commissioner shall consider among other factors: (1) knowledge by merchants engaging in the act or practice of the inability of consumers to receive properly anticipated benefits from the goods or services involved; (2) gross disparity between the price of goods or services and their value measured by the price at which similar goods or services are readily obtained by other consumers; (3) the fact that the acts or practices may enable merchants to take advantage of the inability of consumers reasonably to protect their interests by reason of physical or mental infirmities, illiteracy or inability to understand the language of the agreement, ignorance or lack of education, or similar factors; (4) the degree to which terms of the transaction require consumers to waive legal rights; (5) the degree to which terms of the transaction require consumers to jeopardize money or property beyond the money or property immediately at issue in the transaction; and (6) definitions of unconscionability in statutes, regulations, rulings and decisions of legislative, or judicial bodies in this state or elsewhere. c. Consumer goods, services, credit and debts. As used in section 20-700 of this subchapter and subdivisions a and b of this section, goods, services, credit and debts which are primarily for personal, household or family purposes. d. Consumer. A purchaser or lessee or prospective purchaser or lessee of the consumer goods or services or consumer credit, including a co-obligor or surety. e. Merchant. A seller, lessor, or creditor or any other person who makes available either directly or indirectly, goods, services or credit, to consumers. Merchant shall include manufacturers, wholesalers and others who are responsible for any act or practice prohibited by this subchapter. § 20-702 Regulations. The commissioner may adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter, including regulations defining specific deceptive or unconscionable trade practices. Such rules and regulations may supplement but shall not be inconsistent with the rules, regulations and decisions of the federal trade commission and the federal courts in interpreting the provisions of section five (a) (1), the federal trade commission act 15 U.S.C. § 45(a)(1), or the decisions of the courts interpreting section three hundred fifty of the general business law and section 2-302 of the uniform commercial code. § 20-703 Enforcement. a. The violation of any provision of this subchapter or of any rule promulgated thereunder shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not less than $350 nor more than $2,500. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of $150, $250, and $350 for a first, second and third or any subsequent violation, respectively, of the same rule for: (1) failing to display a sign in the required form or location or with the content required by rule, including but not limited to any such violation of section 24, 37, or 66 of chapter 5 of title 6 of the rules of the city of New York, or any successor to such provisions; (2) failing to provide a consumer with a required receipt for a retail purchase below $250, including but not limited to any such violation of section 32 of chapter 5 of such title, or any successor to such provision; (3) charging sales tax on the sale of any good or service not subject to such tax, including but not limited to any such violation of section 41 of chapter 5 of such title, or any successor to such provision; or (4) imposing a restaurant surcharge, including but not limited to any such violation of section 59 of chapter 5 of such title, or any successor to such provision. b. Each individual statement, description or other representation or omission that constitutes a deceptive trade practice shall give rise to a distinct and independent violation. c. Each day on which an individual statement, description or other representation or omission that constitutes a deceptive trade practice is distributed, broadcast, posted, published, or otherwise exposed to the public shall give rise to a single separate violation; provided, however, that if the department produces evidence sufficient to show that such statement, description or other representation or omission was distributed, broadcast, posted, published, or otherwise exposed to the public on more than one occasion in a single day, each such exposure shall constitute a separate violation, or, alternatively, if the department produces sufficient evidence to show the number of consumers reached by such statement, description or other representation or omission, and that the person making such statement, description or other representation or omission knew, or should have known, that such statement, description or other representation or omission was a deceptive trade practice, a penalty for such violation shall be based instead on each individual consumer reached by such statement, description or other representation or omission. d. 1. The knowing violation or the third violation of any provision of this subchapter or of any rule promulgated thereunder shall be punishable: i. by a civil penalty of $3,500; or ii. as a violation for which a fine of $3,500 shall be imposed; or iii. both by a civil penalty and as a violation with a fine as provided in paragraphs i and ii of this subdivision. 2. For the purposes of this subdivision, the term third violation means a third violation of the same section of this subchapter or rule in a three-year period, provided that each such violation was set forth in a separate guilty plea, decision or settlement agreement. e. Whenever any person has engaged in any act or practice which constitutes a violation of any provision of this subchapter or of any rule promulgated thereunder, the city may make application to the supreme court by action or proceeding or the commissioner may commence a proceeding by service of a notice of violation returnable to any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or within any agency of the city designated to conduct such proceedings. f. In addition to the authority granted to the department under section 2203 of the charter, the corporation counsel may initiate any investigation to ascertain such facts as may be necessary for the commencement of an action or proceeding pursuant to this section, and in connection therewith shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, to administer oaths and to examine such persons as are deemed necessary. g. An application to the supreme court made pursuant to subdivision e may seek an order: 1. enjoining such acts or practices, including by granting a temporary or permanent injunction or a restraining order; 2. imposing civil penalties pursuant to this section; 3. compelling a defendant to make restitution of all monies, property, or other things of value, or proceeds thereof, received directly or indirectly as a result of any such violation; 4. directing that the amount of money or the property or other things of value recovered be paid into an account established pursuant to section 2601 of the civil practice law and rules from which shall be paid over to any and all persons who purchased the goods or services during the period of violation such sum as was paid by them in a transaction involving the prohibited acts or practices, plus any costs incurred by such claimants in making and pursuing their complaints; provided that if such claims exceed the sum recovered into the account, the awards to consumers shall be prorated according to the value of each claim proved; 5. directing a defendant to pay to the city the costs and disbursements of the action or proceeding and the costs of the city's investigation leading to the judgment; or if not recovered from a defendant, such costs are to be deducted by the city from the grand recovery before distribution to the consumers; 6. directing that any money, property, or other things of value in the account described in this subdivision and unclaimed by any persons with such claims within six years from creation of the account, be paid to the city; and 7. granting all other appropriate relief. h. Consumers making claims against an account established pursuant to subdivision g shall prove their claims to the commissioner in a manner and subject to procedures established by the commissioner. The procedures established in each case for proving claims shall not be employed until approved by the court, which shall also establish by order the minimum means by which the commissioner shall notify potential claimants of the creation of the account. Restitution pursuant to a judgment in an action or proceeding under this subdivision shall bar, to the extent permitted by law, the recovery of any damages in any other action or proceeding against the same defendant on account of the same acts or practices which were the basis for such judgment, up to the time of the judgment, by any person to whom such restitution is made. Restitution under this subdivision shall not apply to transactions entered into more than five years prior to commencement of an action by the city. Before instituting an action or proceeding under paragraphs 3 through 6 of subdivision g, the commissioner shall give the prospective defendant written notice of the possible action or proceeding at least five days prior to such action or proceeding. i. A proceeding by service of a notice of violation returnable to any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or within any agency of the city designated to conduct such proceedings, made pursuant to subdivision e, may seek an order: 1. granting all applicable civil penalties pursuant to this section; 2. compelling a defendant to make restitution of all monies, property, or other things of value, or proceeds thereof, received directly or indirectly as a result of any such violations, to all affected consumers whether named or unnamed; and 3. granting all other appropriate relief. j. To establish a cause of action under this section it need not be shown that consumers are being or were actually injured. § 20-704 Settlements. a. In lieu of instituting or continuing an action or proceeding pursuant to this subchapter, the commissioner may accept written assurance of discontinuance of any act or practice in violation of this subchapter from a person who has engaged in such acts or practices. Such assurance may include a stipulation for voluntary payment by the violator of the costs of investigation by the commissioner and may also include a stipulation for the restitution by the violator to consumers, of money, property, or other things of value received from them directly or indirectly in connection with a violation of this subchapter, including money necessarily expended in the course of making and pursuing a complaint to the commissioner. All settlements shall be made a matter of public record. If a stipulation applies to potential claimants, the assurance may specify the minimum means by which such claimants shall be notified of the stipulation. A consumer need not accept restitution pursuant to such a stipulation; his or her acceptance shall bar, to the extent permitted by law, recovery of any other damages in any action or proceeding by him or her against a defendant on account of the same acts or practices. b. Violation of an assurance entered into pursuant to this section shall be treated as a violation of this subchapter and shall be subject to all the penalties provided therefor. § 20-705 Persons excluded from this subchapter. Nothing in this subchapter shall apply to any television or radio broadcasting station or to any publisher or printer of a newspaper, magazine, or other form of printed advertising, who broadcasts, publishes, or prints such advertisement, except insofar as said station or publisher or printer is guilty of deception on the sale or offering for sale of its own services. This subchapter shall not apply to advertising agencies, provided they are acting on information provided by their clients. § 20-706 Permitted practices. The provisions of this subchapter shall be construed so as to supplement the rules, regulations, and decisions of the federal trade commission and the courts interpreting 15 U.S.C. § 45(a)(1), but the provisions of this subchapter shall in no instance be interpreted in a manner inconsistent with the rules, regulations and decisions of the federal trade commission and the courts interpreting 15 U.S.C. § 45(a)(1). § 20-706.1 Outreach and education on consumer protection issues for young adults. The commissioner shall establish and engage in outreach and education efforts that are tailored to individuals ages sixteen to twenty-four. Such outreach and education shall concern consumer issues that are likely to affect individuals ages sixteen to twenty-four including, but not limited to: (a) credit card debt; (b) student loans; and (c) leasing or purchasing a motor vehicle. Such outreach and education shall also provide information related to the department's office of financial empowerment and its financial education providers. The outreach and education required by this section shall commence on September 1, 2015 and shall include educational materials that shall be made available on the department's website, and submitted to the chancellor of the New York city department of education and the chancellor of the city university of New York no later than September 1, 2015. The educational materials made available on the department's website pursuant to this section shall be made available in English and in the six languages most commonly spoken by limited English proficient individuals in the city as determined by the department of city planning. The commissioner shall update the educational materials made available on the department's website on an annual basis and submit such updated materials each year to the chancellor of the New York city department of education and the chancellor of the city university of New York. § 20-706.2 Business education events. a. 1. The commissioner shall organize and conduct business education events during which the department shall provide local businesses with information regarding the laws and rules that are enforced by the department. The commissioner of small business services shall support the department in the organization and operation of such business education events. 2. Such business education events shall occur in at least two separate locations within each borough on an annual basis. The first such business education event shall commence on or before June 30, 2015. 3. Each business education event shall either focus on a particular industry that is licensed or regulated by the department, or shall focus on one or more of the laws and rules that are relevant to multiple industries and enforced by the department, provided that, information relating to all laws and rules that are enforced by the department, including but not limited to the licensing laws contained in chapter two of title 20 of the administrative code, the consumer protection law contained in this subchapter, and the truth in pricing law contained in subchapter two of chapter five of title 20 of the administrative code, shall be included as a part of at least one business education event each year. 4. Any lectures or educational materials designed for the purposes of conducting such business education events shall be made available in English and in the six languages most commonly spoken by limited English proficient individuals, as those languages are determined by the department of city planning. Such educational materials shall be available on the department's website. b. On June 30, 2016, and annually thereafter, the department shall submit to the speaker of the council a report related to the business education events held during the prior 12 month period. Such report shall include, but not be limited to: (i) the number of business education events held; (ii) the location of each business education event; (iii) the number of participants in each business education event disaggregated by location; and (iv) a summary of the information provided to participants. § 20-706.3 Outreach and education on consumer protection for seniors. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section: Naturally Occurring Retirement Community. The term naturally occurring retirement community means an apartment building, housing complex, or housing development, as identified by the department for the aging: (i) that was not originally built for senior citizens; (ii) that is not restricted in admissions solely to seniors; and (iii) where at least 2,500 senior citizens reside or at least 50 percent of the dwelling units are occupied by one or more senior citizens. Senior Center. The term senior center shall have the same meaning as provided by section 21-201. b. The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner for the aging, shall establish and engage in outreach and education efforts that are tailored to individuals ages 60 years and older. Such outreach and education shall relate to consumer issues that are likely to affect individuals ages 60 and older including, but not limited to: (i) telemarketing and internet fraud; (ii) social security, medicare and healthcare fraud; (iii) reverse mortgage products; and (iv) investment schemes. Such outreach and education shall also provide information related to the department's office of financial empowerment and its financial education providers, as well as information on how to report fraudulent activity. The outreach and education required by this section shall commence on December 1, 2016 and shall include, but not be limited to, educational materials that shall be made available on the department's website on or before such date, and submitted to the commissioner for the aging no later than December 1, 2016. The educational materials made available on the department's website pursuant to this section shall be made available in English and in the six languages most commonly spoken by limited English proficient individuals in the city as determined by the department of city planning. The commissioner shall review the educational materials made available on the department's website, update the educational materials as needed, and submit any such updated materials to the commissioner for the aging annually as needed. c. The commissioner for the aging shall make best efforts to ensure that the materials required by subdivision b of this section are made available at every senior center and naturally occurring retirement community as soon as practicable. § 20-706.4 Outreach and education program for immigrants relating to consumer protection. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section: IDNYC. The term IDNYC means the New York city identity card established pursuant to section 3-115. ITIN. The term ITIN means an individual taxpayer identification number issued by the internal revenue service for the purpose of filing federal taxes. b. By December 1, 2016, the commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of the mayor's office of immigrant affairs, shall establish and implement an outreach and education program to promote the financial stability and success of immigrants. Such outreach and education program shall relate to access to consumer and financial products and services, and protection from risks and frauds to which certain immigrant consumers may be particularly vulnerable, including but not limited to identifying: (i) financial institutions that accept the IDNYC or ITIN for purposes of opening a bank account; (ii) risks and consequences to consumers of using non-bank institutions such as check cashers, money transfer companies and other similar financial institutions; (iii) state and local laws regulating employment and immigration assistance services; (iv) federal and state laws regulating tax preparers; and (v) local institutions that offer preferred products and services to immigrants and immigrant communities, such as community-based organizations, credit unions and other community development financial institutions. c. Such outreach and education program shall also provide information related to the office of financial empowerment and its financial education providers. The outreach and education program shall include the production of educational materials that shall be made available on the department's website and submitted to the commissioner of the mayor's office of immigrant affairs. The educational materials made available on the department's website pursuant to this section shall be made available in English and in the six languages most commonly spoken by limited English proficient individuals in the city as determined by the department of city planning. The commissioner shall review the educational materials made available on the department's website on an annual basis, update the educational material as needed, and submit such updated materials each year to the commissioner of the mayor's office of immigrant affairs on or before December 1 of each year. § 20-706.5 Consumer protection outreach and education program for women. By December 1, 2016, the commissioner, in consultation with the commission on gender equity, the mayor's office to end domestic and gender-based violence, and other city agencies as appropriate, shall establish and implement an outreach and education program to promote women's financial independence, stability and success. Such program shall provide information on issues that typically and especially affect vulnerable populations, including but not limited to the following: (i) short- and long-term financial planning, including planning for retirement; (ii) navigation of public benefits programs; (iii) the prevalence of gender-based pricing; and (iv) deceptive business practices and predatory consumer and financial products. Such outreach and education program shall also provide information related to the office of financial empowerment and its financial education providers. The outreach and education program required by this section shall include the production of educational materials that shall be made available on the department's website and submitted to the commission on gender equity and the mayor's office to end domestic and gender-based violence. Such educational materials shall be made available in English and in the six languages most commonly spoken by limited English proficient individuals in the city as determined by the department of city planning. The commissioner shall review the educational materials made available on the department's website on an annual basis, update the educational material as needed, and submit such updated material to the commission on gender equity, the mayor's office to end domestic and gender- based violence, and other city agencies as appropriate on or before December 1 of each year. Subchapter 2: Truth-in-Pricing Law § 20-707 Definitions. (a) Consumer commodity shall be defined as any article, good, merchandise, product or commodity of any kind or class produced, distributed or offered for retail sale for consumption by individuals, or for personal, household or family purposes. For the purposes of this subchapter, drugs, medicines and cosmetics shall not be considered consumer commodities. (b) Price per measure shall be defined as the retail price of a consumer commodity expressed in terms of the retail price of such commodity per such unit of weight, standard measure or standard number of units as the commissioner shall designate by regulation. § 20-708 Display of total selling price by tag or sign. All consumer commodities, sold, exposed for sale or offered for sale at retail except those items subject to section 20-708.1 of this code, shall have conspicuously displayed, at the point of exposure or offering for sale, the total selling price exclusive of tax by means of (a) a stamp, tag or label attached to the item or (b) by a sign at the point of display which indicates the item to which the price refers, provided that this information is plainly visible at the point of display for sale of the items so indicated. This section shall not apply to consumer commodities displayed in the window of the seller. § 20-708.1 Item pricing. a. Definitions. The following terms shall have the following meanings for the purpose of this section: 1. Stock keeping unit, known in the industry as SKU, shall mean each group of items offered for sale of the same brand name, quantity of contents, retail price, and variety within the following categories: (a) Food, including all material, solid, liquid or mixed, whether simple or compound, used or intended for consumption by human beings or domestic animals normally kept as household pets and all substances or ingredients to be added thereto for any purpose; (b) Napkins, facial tissues, toilet tissues, paper towelling and any disposable wrapping or container for the storage, handling, serving, or disposal of food; (c) Detergents, soaps and other cleansing agents; and (d) Non-prescription drugs, menstrual products and health and beauty aids. 2. Stock keeping item shall mean each individual item of a stock keeping unit offered for sale. This shall include two or more pieces packaged for sale together. 3. Retail store shall mean a store engaged in selling stock keeping units at retail. A store which is not open to the general public but is reserved for use by its members shall come within the provisions of this definition unless the members must pay a direct fee to the store to qualify for membership and the store is not required to collect sales tax on transactions with members. A retail store shall not include any store which: (a) Has as its only full-time employee the owner thereof, or the parent, spouse, domestic partner or child of the owner, and in addition thereto not more than two full-time employees; or (b) Had annual gross sales of stock keeping items in the previous calendar year of less than two million dollars, unless the retail store is part of a network of subsidiaries, affiliates or other member stores, under direct or indirect common control, which, as a group, had annual gross sales of stock keeping items in the previous calendar year of two million dollars or more; or (c) Engages primarily in the sale of food for consumption on the premises or in a specialty trade which the commissioner determines, by rule, would be inappropriate for item pricing. 4. Item price shall mean the tag, stamp or mark affixed to a stock keeping item which sets forth, in Arabic numerals, the retail price thereof. 5. Advertised price shall mean the price of a stock keeping unit which a retail store has caused to be disseminated by means of promotional methods such as an in-store sign, or newspaper, circular, television or radio advertising. 6. Shelf price shall mean the tag or sign placed at each point of display of a stock keeping unit, which clearly sets forth the retail price of the stock keeping items within that stock keeping unit. 7. Computer-assisted checkout system shall mean any electronic device, computer system or machine which indicates the selling price of a stock keeping item by interpreting its universal product code, or an in-house product code, or by use of its price look-up function. 8. Price look-up function shall mean the capability of any checkout system to determine the retail price of a stock keeping item by way of the manual entry into the system of a code number assigned to that particular stock keeping unit by the retail store or by way of the checkout operator's consultation of a file maintained at the point of sale. 9. Inspector shall mean the commissioner or his or her designee. 10. Price scanner shall mean a laser scanning or other computer assisted price checking mechanism used in conjunction with scanner codes. b. Item pricing required. Except as provided in subdivision c of this section, every person, firm, partnership, corporation or association which sells, offers for sale or exposes for sale in a retail store, a stock keeping unit, shall disclose to the consumer the item price of each stock keeping item, by causing the item price to be conspicuously, clearly and plainly marked, stamped, tagged or affixed thereto. c. Certain items exempted. The following stock keeping items need not be item priced as provided in subdivision b of this section provided that a shelf price and a price look-up function are maintained for such stock keeping items: 1. Milk. 2. Stock keeping items which are under three cubic inches in size, and weigh less than three ounces, and are priced under one dollar. 3. Eggs. 4. Fresh produce not packaged for final retail sale. 5. Products sold through a vending machine. 6. Food sold for consumption on the premises. 7. Snack foods such as cakes, gum, candies, chips and nuts offered for sale in single packages and weighing five ounces or less. 8. Cigarettes, cigars, tobacco and tobacco products. 9. Food offered for sale in bulk. 10. Frozen juice. 11. Ice cream. 12. Frozen foods packaged for final retail sale in plastic bags. 13. Stock keeping items on sale for one week or less, where such stock keeping items are not otherwise item priced, are located in a segregated display at the end of an aisle, and the sale period, the name of the product and the advertised price are clearly and conspicuously posted on a sign at the point of display. Failure to display this information shall be deemed a deceptive practice under section 20-701 of this code. 14. Baby food packaged in jars. 15. Any stock keeping item that is capable of being scanned, and which is sold, offered for sale, or exposed for sale at a retail store that has, as determined by rule of the commissioner, a sufficient number, in proportion to the retail store size, of clearly marked and functioning price scanners for consumer use, in adequate locations. d. Checkout scanner accuracy. In a retail store with a laser scanning or other computer-assisted checkout system, an inspector shall be permitted to compare the disclosed retail price of any one stock keeping item within any stock keeping unit sold in the retail store, whether or not exempt under subdivision c of this section, not to exceed five hundred stock keeping items at any one inspection, with the programmed computer price. The retail store shall provide such access to the computer as is necessary for the inspector to make the determination. The inspector shall also make note of undercharges on the inspection report. In the event that the programmed computer price exceeds the lowest price a retail store is permitted to charge for a stock keeping item under subdivision e of this section, this shall be deemed a deceptive practice under section 20-701 of this code. e. Price accuracy. No retail store shall charge a retail price for any stock keeping item, whether or not exempt under subdivision c of this section, which exceeds the lower of any item, shelf, sale or advertised price of such stock keeping item. f. Enforcement, penalties. 1. Upon the request of an inspector, the retail store representatives shall afford the inspector access to the test mode of the checkout system in use at that retail store or to a comparable function of such system and to the retail price information contained in a price look-up function. No more than one inspection shall be conducted in any twenty-four hour period. 2. In addition to the enforcement powers prescribed in sections 20-703 and 20-704 of this code, the commissioner may, upon due notice, hold hearings to determine whether violations of the provisions of this section have occurred. Such notice shall contain a concise statement of the facts constituting the alleged violation and shall set forth the date, time and place of the hearing. Upon a finding of a violation of the provisions of this section, the commissioner shall be authorized to impose a civil penalty as follows: (a) upon inspection, up to $25 for the first 20 violations and up to $50 for each successive violation, total violations not to exceed $2,000, except that a retail store shall not be subject to the civil penalty described above for a first-time violation or first-time violations of subdivision b of this section or any rule promulgated thereunder if such retail store proves to the satisfaction of the department, within 30 days of the issuance of the notice of violation or notices of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of such notice or notices, that the violation or violations have been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation or violations have been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a retail store that has received a notice of violation or notices of violation for a first-time violation or first-time violations of subdivision b of this section or any rule promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A retail store may seek review, in the department, of the determination that proof of a cure was not submitted within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination. (b) upon a second or subsequent inspection within 60 days of a violation, up to $50 for the first 20 violations, and up to $100 for each successive violation, total violations issued not to exceed $8,000. 3. Each failure to comply with subdivision b of this section with respect to any one stock keeping unit shall constitute a separate violation, provided, however, that no violation shall be found where less than five stock keeping items of a particular stock keeping unit lack clearly readable item prices. Following an initial inspection, each inspection that finds a continuing violation with respect to a particular stock keeping unit cited within the previous fourteen days shall constitute a separate continued violation. g. Rules. The commissioner may promulgate such rules as he or she may deem necessary or appropriate to effectuate the purposes of this section. All consumer commodities designated by the commissioner in accordance with subdivision (a) of section 20-710 hereof exposed for sale or offered for sale shall be plainly marked by a stamp, tag, label or sign at the point of display with the appropriate price per measure; provided however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any food store having had annual gross sales in the previous tax year of less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars, ($250,000) unless it is a part of a network of subsidiaries, affiliates, or other member stores, under direct or indirect common control, which, as a group, had annual gross sales in the previous tax year of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000) or more. § 20-710 Regulations. (a) The commissioner after public hearings shall promulgate regulations designating those consumer commodities which shall come within the scope of section 20-709 of this subchapter whenever the commissioner shall find that, because of the nature, form, mode of packaging or other reason, such price display for that commodity shall be necessary and appropriate to provide adequate information to the consumer. (b) The commissioner shall promulgate regulations exempting any class or classes of retail establishments from the requirements of section 20-709 hereof or modifying its application with respect to any class or classes of retail establishments to the extent that and under such conditions as are consistent with the policy of this subchapter whenever the commissioner shall find that, because of the nature of such class or classes of retail establishments, compliance with section 20-709 hereof is unreasonably burdensome or unnecessary for adequate protection of consumers. (c) The commissioner shall promulgate such other regulations as shall be necessary in his or her discretion to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter, including but not limited to, requirements as to the manner of display of unit price information. § 20-711 Penalties. Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 20-708 or section 20-709 hereof or rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter, other than the provisions of section 20-708.1 or rules promulgated under such section, shall pay a civil penalty of fifty dollars for the first violation, one hundred and seventy-five dollars for the second violation and two hundred fifty dollars for the third and each subsequent violation and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars nor more than two hundred fifty dollars for each violation; except that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of section 20-708 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-708 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. For the purposes of this section, each group of identical consumer commodities for which on any single day the total selling price or price per measure is not displayed in accordance with section 20-708 or section 20-709 or rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter, other than the provisions of section 20-708.1 or rules promulgated under such section, shall be considered a single violation. 11/15/2021) § 20-712 Definitions. As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Emergency contraception. The term emergency contraception means one or more prescription drugs, used separately or in combination, to be administered to or self-administered by the patient in a dosage and manner for preventing pregnancy when used after intercourse, found safe and effective for that use by the United States food and drug administration, and dispensed for that purpose in accordance with professional standards of practice. Pharmacy. The term pharmacy means any retail outlet selling prescription drugs within the city. Prescription drugs. The term prescription drugs means any drug which may be dispensed only with a physician's prescription. § 20-713 Display of prescription drug prices. Repealed. § 20-713.1 Display of information relating to emergency contraception. Any pharmacy that does not sell emergency contraception must conspicuously post, at or adjacent to each counter over which prescription drugs are sold, indicating in large type that emergency contraception is not sold at such pharmacy. § 20-714 Regulations. The commissioner shall promulgate such regulations as shall be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter. § 20-715 Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of section 20-713.1 or regulations promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall pay a civil penalty of one hundred seventy-five dollars for the first offense, five hundred dollars for the second offense and seven hundred and fifty dollars for the third offense and each succeeding offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than five hundred dollars for the first offense and for each succeeding offense a fine of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars for each such violation. For the purposes of this section, if on any single day the required signage is not displayed in accordance with section 20-713.1 or regulations promulgated pursuant to this subchapter, it shall be considered a single violation. The council hereby finds that the demand for electricity in the city has been steadily growing; that the supply of electricity has on frequent occasions been inadequate fully to meet the demand therefor; that the distribution system of the public utility company serving most of the city has frequently been disrupted by heavy loads; that major brownouts and blackouts in various sections of the city have frequently resulted from such conditions, particularly in the summer; that there is no present basis for concluding that such conditions will not continue for the foreseeable future; that fifty percent of the annual summer growth in demand for electricity in the city is due to air conditioning, that forty percent of the peak summer demand for electricity in the city is attributable to air conditioning; that room air conditioners use a significant part of the electricity used for air conditioning in the city; that the amount of electricity used by room air conditioners of comparable cooling capacity varies widely; that most sellers of room air conditioners do not presently advertise, display or otherwise provide prospective purchasers information as to the amount or cost of electricity required to operate the various models of room air conditioners; that such information, if provided, would lead consumers to purchase more efficient models; that the growth in demand for electricity in the city, particularly in summer months, would thereby be slowed and there would be an amelioration of some of the conditions which lead to brownouts and blackouts. The council also finds that an adequate supply of electricity is vital to the health, safety and welfare of all persons in the city. Accordingly, the council further finds that, in order to conserve electricity, there is a need to provide prospective purchasers of room air conditioners with information with respect to the efficiency and cost of operation of such units. § 20-717 Definitions. (a) Room air conditioner shall be defined as any electrical appliance which has a compressor, a condenser, an evaporator and a fan to cool and dehumidify the surrounding air and which is capable in ordinary usage of being mounted in a window or through a wall. (b) Cooling capacity rating shall be defined as the quantity of heat in British thermal units which a room air conditioner is capable of removing in one hour. (c) Wattage rating shall be defined as the number of watts of electricity necessary to obtain the cooling capacity rating of a room air conditioner. (d) Person shall be defined as any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, association or other organization who is ordinarily engaged in the business of selling or offering for sale room air conditioners. § 20-718 Display of information. Any person selling, offering for sale or displaying for sale any room air conditioner shall set forth by a stamp, tab, label or sign at the point of display the model number, cooling capacity rating, wattage rating and estimated yearly cost of electricity necessary to operate such room air conditioner. § 20-719 Furnishing information. Upon request, any person selling or offering for sale any room air conditioner shall furnish to anyone who inquires about such room air conditioner information as to the model number, cooling capacity rating, wattage rating and estimated yearly cost of electricity necessary to operate such room air conditioner. § 20-720 Advertising. Any person who advertises a room air conditioner for sale in the city shall include in any advertisement therefor the model number, cooling capacity rating, wattage rating and estimated yearly cost of electricity necessary to operate such room air conditioner. § 20-721 Regulations. (a) The commissioner shall adopt regulations setting forth procedures for determining the cooling capacity rating, wattage rating and estimated yearly cost of electricity necessary to operate room air conditioners. (b) In determining procedures for estimating the yearly cost of electricity necessary to operate room air conditioners, the commissioner may use such published electric rate or rates, hours of operation, and average thereof as he or she deems reasonable. § 20-722 Penalties. Any person or agent or employee thereof who shall violate any provision of this subchapter or of the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be subject to a civil penalty of twenty-five dollars for each day in which a violation occurs, except that any person or agent or employee thereof shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of any provision of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The notice of violation for such first violation shall inform the respondent of the provision of law or rule that the department believes the respondent has violated, describe the condition or activity that is the basis for the notice of violation, and advise the respondent that the law authorizes civil penalties for such violation and that subsequent violations may result in the imposition of such civil penalties. Subchapter 5: Representations in Advertising § 20-723 Representations in advertising. No person, firm, corporation or association, or agent or employee thereof, doing business in New York city, who with intent to sell or in any way dispose of merchandise to the public through the media of a newspaper, magazine, circular, pamphlet, catalogue, store display, letter or handbill shall advertise, state, set forth, print, publish or cause directly or indirectly or permit directly or indirectly, so to be done in any of the aforesaid media, any of the following or anything approximating any of the following: (a) That the merchandise offered as aforesaid is being offered at wholesale price or at manufacturers' cost or less than cost or any similar language, unless such representations are true in fact; nor shall any such person, firm or corporation or association, or agent or employee thereof, doing business in New York city, offer for sale any product at a price purported to be reduced from what is a fictitious list or selling or retailer's suggested price, or at a purported reduction in any such price when such purported reduction is in fact fictitious. (b) That the merchandise offered as aforesaid is being offered on the basis of comparative prices or percentage savings, or similar or analogous claims by the use of such terms as comparable value or comparable retail value, without denoting, defining or describing the standard of comparison. (c) That the merchandise offered as aforesaid is being offered as made to sell for, or being worth or valued at, a certain price greater or more than the price sought, or by the use of similar or analogous statements unless such claim or representation is true in fact. § 20-723.1 Advertising disclosure requirements for lenders promoting payday loan services. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section: (1) Payday loan, also known as, among other terms, deferred deposit advances, cash on demand or cash advance, shall mean any transaction in which funds are provided to a consumer for a limited time period in exchange for (i) a consumer's personal check or share draft, in the amount of the funds provided to the consumer plus a fee, where presentment or negotiation of such check or share draft is deferred by agreement of the parties until a designated future date; or (ii) a consumer's authorization to debit the consumer's transaction account, in the amount of the funds provided to the consumer plus a fee, where such account will be debited on or after a designated future date. (2) Unit of advertising space shall mean any real property, space, facility or instrumentality, or any portion thereof, owned or operated by the city of New York, or which is located or operates on real property owned or operated by the city of New York, and which is the subject of the same contract, lease, rental agreement, franchise, revocable consent, concession or other similar written agreement with the city of New York which allows the placement or display of advertisements, but not including any real property, space or facility leased from the city of New York for a term of thirty years or more during the entire term of the lease or any real property, space or facility leased from or to the industrial development agency. b. Any lender, bank or other financial institution that provides payday loan or grant services and which promotes its payday loan or grant services, however described or designated, via a unit or units of advertising space, and which, because of the application of other state or federal law, is exempt from the fee limitations of New York state, and charge interest, fees and other charges greater than those authorized in New York state, shall comply with the following disclosure requirements with respect to a unit or units of advertising space: Advertisements shall disclose, in clear and prominent letter type, in a print color that contrasts with the background against which it appears, of at least a 20-point type size: i. the maximum annual percentage rates (APR) of the institution's payday loans, computed in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant to the federal Truth-in-Lending Act; and ii. any membership fees, finance charges, annual fees, transaction fees, rollover costs, lender's fees or any other possible charges that may be incurred by a consumer in relation to the institution's payday loans, including any interest, fees and other charges due at the time of any loan renewal; iii. the state in which the lender/financial institution is chartered; iv. the fact that the consumer will be required to supply personal information to receive the institution's payday loan, including information regarding his or her personal financial history; v. the fact that a fee schedule for all charges related to the institution's payday loans will be available upon request; vi. a contact number, such as the New York state banking department's Consumer Hotline, where a consumer/applicant can direct complaints against the lender/financial institution; vii. the name of the lender/financial institution offering the payday loan. c. Any person who is a party to an otherwise valid agreement with the city of New York in effect on the date of enactment of the local law that added this section shall not be subject to the requirements of this section for the term of such agreement. However, where such agreement provides for a right or rights of renewal for one or more periods upon the same terms and conditions or terms and conditions set forth in such agreement, the holder who is a party to such agreement or any agreements entered into pursuant to such right or rights of renewal shall be subject to the requirements of this section at the commencement of the first renewal period. d. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department shall be authorized upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for the violation of any provision of this section. The department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose civil penalties not to exceed the amounts specified in section 20-726 of this subchapter for each such violation. All proceedings authorized pursuant to this paragraph shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. The remedies and penalties provided for in this paragraph shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. (2) All such proceedings shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. § 20-723.2 Disclosure requirements for businesses promoting credit counseling services. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section: (1) Credit counselor shall mean any person, partnership, firm, corporation or business entity advertising, promoting, or offering the type or category of credit counseling services required to be received as a pre- condition for filing a petition for bankruptcy under the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005, including, but not limited to, consideration of alternatives to resolve a client's credit problems and an analysis of the client's budget, current financial condition, factors that caused such financial condition, and how such client can develop a plan to respond to the problems without incurring negative amortization of debt. (2) Approved credit counselor shall mean a credit counselor listed in the directory of authorized nonprofit budget and credit counseling service providers promulgated pursuant to the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005. b. (1) Any person, partnership, firm, corporation or business entity promoting or offering the services of a credit counselor, notwithstanding whether such person, partnership, firm, corporation or business entity accepts a fee for such services, shall provide written notice to any potential or actual consumer when such person, partnership, corporation, firm or business is not an approved credit counselor. (2) Such notice, to be signed by any potential or actual consumer, shall include, but not be limited to, the following provisions: i. that the federal Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005 created an approval process for nonprofit budget and credit counseling agencies that provide an evaluation of your current financial situation, a discussion on alternatives to bankruptcy and a personal budget plan; ii. that to be approved by the United States Trustee and added to the directory of approved credit counselors, a credit counselor must satisfactorily demonstrate compliance with the requirements of the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005; iii. that such credit counselor is not approved to offer bankruptcy counseling services pursuant to the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005; iv. that a consumer of a credit counselor may contact the United States department of justice or the clerk of the United States bankruptcy court for the southern and eastern districts of New York for a list of credit counselors approved pursuant to the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005, if such consumer is considering filing a bankruptcy petition; v. that a consumer of a credit counselor is not required to obtain a loan or enter into a contract for debt repayment with any specific credit counselor; and vi. such other provisions as the department may deem appropriate. c. Any person, partnership, firm, corporation or business entity that holds itself out to the public in printed, televised, or radio media as providing the services of a credit counselor but is not an approved credit counselor shall disclose in such media that it is not an approved credit counselor pursuant to the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005. d. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department shall be authorized upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for the violation of any provision of this section. The department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose civil penalties of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars nor more than five thousand dollars for each violation. All proceedings authorized pursuant to this paragraph shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. The remedies and penalties provided for in this paragraph shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. (2) All such proceedings shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. (3) The commissioner shall conspicuously disclose on its web site all persons, partnerships, firms, corporations or business entities that have been found to have violated any provisions of this section, or rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, within the preceding twelve months. Such disclosure shall, at minimum, list the name of each person, partnership, firm, corporation or business entity found to have violated any provisions of this section, or rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, as well as the nature of each violation. § 20-723.3 Disclosure requirements for distressed property consultants. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Consulting services means services promised by a distressed property consultant to a homeowner, including but not limited to services that the consultant represents will help to achieve any of the following: i. An action to stop, enjoin, delay, set aside, annul, stay or postpone a foreclosure filing, a foreclosure sale or the loss of a home for nonpayment of taxes; ii. A forbearance from any servicer, beneficiary or mortgagee or relief with respect to the potential loss of the home for nonpayment of taxes; iii. The exercise of a right of reinstatement or similar right by the homeowner as provided in the mortgage documents or any law or the refinancing of a distressed home loan; iv. Any extension of the period within which the homeowner may reinstate or otherwise restore his or her rights with respect to the property; v. A waiver of an acceleration clause contained in any promissory note or contract secured by a mortgage on a property in foreclosure; vi. A loan or advance of funds; vii. Assistance to the homeowner in answering or responding to a summons and complaint, or otherwise providing information regarding the foreclosure complaint and process; viii. The avoidance or amelioration of the impairment of the homeowner's credit resulting from the commencement of a foreclosure proceeding or tax sale; ix. The saving of the homeowner's property from foreclosure or loss for non-payment of taxes; or x. Any other action as may be deemed subject to section 265-b of the New York state general business law. 2. Distressed home loan means a home loan that is in danger of being foreclosed because the homeowner has one or more defaults under the mortgage that entitles the lender to accelerate full payment of the mortgage and repossess the property, or a home loan where the lender has commenced a foreclosure action. For purposes of this paragraph, a home loan is a loan in which the debt is incurred by the homeowner, or shareholder in a cooperative corporation, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, and the loan is secured by a mortgage or deed of trust on property, or in the case of a cooperative by a security agreement in shares in a corporation, upon which there is located or there is to be located a structure or structures intended principally for occupancy of from one to four families, which is or will be occupied by the homeowner as the homeowner's principal dwelling. 3. Distressed property consultant means an individual or corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other business entity that, directly or indirectly, solicits or undertakes employment to provide consulting services to a homeowner for compensation or promise of compensation with respect to a distressed home loan or a potential loss of the home for nonpayment of taxes, or any individual or business entity considered a distressed property consultant for purposes of New York state real property law section 265-b. A distressed property consultant does not include the following: i. An attorney admitted to practice in the State of New York; ii. A person or entity who holds or is owed an obligation secured by a lien on any property in foreclosure while the person or entity performs services in connection with the obligation or lien; iii. A bank, trust company, private banker, bank holding company, savings bank, savings and loan association, thrift holding company, credit union or insurance company organized under the laws of this state, another state or the United States, or a subsidiary or affiliate of such entity or a foreign banking corporation licensed by the superintendent of banks or the comptroller of the currency; iv. A federal Department of Housing and Urban Development approved mortgagee and any subsidiary or affiliate of such mortgagee, and any agent or employee of these persons while engaged in the business of such mortgagee; v. A judgment creditor of the homeowner, if the judgment creditor's claim accrues before the written notice of foreclosure sale is sent; vi. A title insurer authorized to do business in this state, while performing title insurance and settlement services; vii. A person licensed as a mortgage banker or registered as a mortgage broker or registered as a mortgage loan servicer as defined in article 12-d of the New York state banking law; viii. A bona fide not-for-profit organization that offers counseling or advice to homeowners in foreclosure or loan default; or ix. A person or entity that the superintendent of banks has determined is not subject to section 265-b of the New York state real property law. 4. Homeowner means a natural person who is the mortgagor with respect to a distressed home loan or who is in danger of losing a home for nonpayment of taxes. 5. Unit of advertising space means any real property, space, facility or instrumentality, or any portion thereof, owned or operated by the city of New York, or which is located or operates on real property owned or operated by the city of New York, and which is the subject of the same contract, lease, rental agreement, franchise, revocable consent, concession or other similar written agreement with the city of New York which allows the placement or display of advertisements, but not including any real property, space or facility leased from the city of New York for a term of thirty years or more during the entire term of the lease or any real property, space or facility leased from or to the industrial development agency. b. Every distressed property consultant who does business in New York City and who advertises distressed property consulting services through the media of a newspaper, magazine, circular, pamphlet, store display, letter or handbill and/or via a unit or units of advertising space, shall disclose in such advertising, in accordance with the rules established by the commissioner, in clear and prominent letter type, in a print color that contrasts with the background against which it appears: 1. that, pursuant to section 265-b of the New York state real property law, a distressed property consultant is prohibited from: i. performing services without a written, fully executed contract with a homeowner; ii. accepting payment for consulting services before the full completion of such services; iii. taking power of attorney from a homeowner; and iv. retaining any original loan document or other original document related to the distressed home loan, the property, or the potential loss of the home for nonpayment of taxes. 2. that hiring a distressed property consultant does not stop the foreclosure process, nor can a distressed property consultant guarantee any particular result with regards to a distressed property. c. The commissioner may make and promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the proper implementation and enforcement of this section. d. Any person who is a party to an otherwise valid agreement with the city of New York in effect on the date of enactment of the local law that added this section shall not be subject to the requirements of this section for the term of such agreement. However, where such agreement provides for a right or rights of renewal for one or more periods upon the same terms and conditions or terms and conditions set forth in such agreement, the holder who is a party to such agreement or any agreements entered into pursuant to such right or rights of renewal shall be subject to the requirements of this section at the commencement of the first renewal period. e. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department shall be authorized upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for the violation of any provision of this section. The department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose civil penalties of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars nor more than five thousand dollars for each violation. All proceedings authorized pursuant to this paragraph shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. The remedies and penalties provided for in this paragraph shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. (2) All such proceedings shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. § 20-724 Requirements of records. Any such person, firm, corporation or association or agent, or employee thereof, doing business in New York city, making any one or more of the aforesaid statements, claims, offers, or representations of the types described in subdivisions (a), (b) and (c) of section 20-723 shall maintain full and adequate records disclosing the facts upon which any such statements, offers, claims or representations are based. (a) All such records shall be open and available for inspection to the commissioner or to his or her duly designated representatives for a period of ninety days from the date of the offer. (b) The failure of any such person, firm, corporation or association, or agent or employee thereof doing business in New York city to produce such records in substantiation of its claims shall be presumptive of the falsity of the advertisement. § 20-725 Rules and regulations. The commissioner may make and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this subchapter. § 20-726 Violations. Any person, firm, corporation or association or agent or employee thereof, who shall violate any of the provisions of this subchapter upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500) or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both. Subchapter 6: Availability for Sale of Advertised Merchandise Repealed. § 20-727 Raincheck issuance disclosure. Repealed. § 20-728 Penalties. Repealed. § 20-729 Regulations. Repealed. Subchapter 7: Information with Respect to Funeral Costs § 20-730 Definitions. a. Alternative container means a non-metal receptacle or enclosure customarily not ornamented and designed for holding or transporting human remains. b. Cash advances or accommodations means amounts advanced on the customer's behalf for various services and merchandise, including, but not limited to: cemetery or crematory charges, clergy honorarium, flowers, newspaper death notices, pall bearers, music, transportation charges, out-of- town funeral director's charges, hairdressers, bridge and road tolls, telephone and telegraph charges, gratuities. c. Casket includes a coffin and means a rigid container designed for the encasement of human remains and customarily ornamented and lined with fabric. d. Customer means any person, association or other entity who purchases or otherwise makes arrangements for the purchase of funeral services or merchandise, without intention of resale. e. Defacement means any deliberate effort to make merchandise appear unattractive to customers including, but not limited to, displaying broken, soiled or defective merchandise. f. Funeral merchandise means articles and supplies sold or offered for sale directly to the public, or used by funeral directors, incident to: (1) the care and preparation of deceased human bodies for burial, cremation or other final disposition; (2) the arrangement, supervision or conducting of the funeral ceremony. g. Funeral services means services performed incident to: (1) the care and preparation of deceased human bodies for burial, cremation, or other final disposition; (2) the arrangement, supervision or conducting of the funeral ceremony and the final disposition of the deceased including, but not limited to, transporting the remains, securing necessary permits, embalming, arranging for death notices, and other funeral-related items. h. Funeral service establishment means the premises used or held out as being used to care for and prepare for burial of the body of a deceased person or maintained as the office from which business is transacted by a funeral director or undertaker. i. Immediate cremation means a disposition of human remains which includes the reduction of the remains by a heating process and which does not involve formal viewing or a prior funeral ceremony with the body present. j. Memorial society means an unincorporated association or not-for- profit corporation which assists members in obtaining and making arrangements for funerals, cremations or other methods of disposition. k. Offered for sale means making available for purchase or suggesting availability of merchandise or services for purchase by use of any advertising or promotional materials, including brochures, handbills, or calendars, or by the displaying of merchandise, or verbal or written expressions, direct or indirect, of a willingness to furnish services or merchandise to the public for a retail price. l. Outer interment receptacle means any container or enclosure which is placed in the grave around the casket to protect the casket or to prevent the collapse of the grave including, but not limited to, receptacles commonly known as burial vaults, grave boxes, or grave liners. m. Provider of funeral services means any person, partnership or corporation, or any employee or agent thereof, engaged in the business of selling or offering for sale, directly to the public, funeral services or funeral merchandise; of preparing deceased human bodies for burial, cremation or other final disposition; or of conducting or arranging funerals. § 20-731 Casket and outer interment receptacle information. a. Any provider of funeral services who offers a casket for sale, or an outer interment receptacle for sale in a selection room, shall prominently display the actual retail price on each casket or outer interment receptacle, in at least one-half inch numbers, as well as composition and model number of such casket or outer interment receptacle. b. Any provider of funeral services who offers a casket or an outer interment receptacle for sale by means other than a selection room shall present to a customer for his or her selection a photograph or other pictorial representation of each model of casket or other interment receptacle so offered, with the price, composition and model number prominently displayed. § 20-732 Statement to be furnished by provider of funeral services. Any provider of funeral services shall prominently display on the funeral services establishment premises and make readily available to any customer or prospective customer a printed presentation sheet. The presentation sheet shall contain an itemized list of all funeral merchandise and services available at the establishment, a statement that the prices therefor are available upon request, and appropriate disclosures regarding legal requirements for procurement of funeral merchandise and services, the form and contents of which shall be prescribed by the commissioner. The presentation sheet shall be made current annually. § 20-733 Prohibited practices. It shall be unlawful for any provider of funeral services: a. to embalm without orally informing the customer that embalming is not required by law or to furnish other services or merchandise including embalming, without having first obtained from the customer explicit written or oral authorization; b. to obtain custody of a deceased human body without having first received from the customer explicit written or oral authorization; c. to fail to promptly release a body or give information regarding the care or whereabouts of a body upon request of a customer; d. to misrepresent cremation needs including requiring a customer who expresses an interest in immediate cremation of deceased human remains to purchase a casket, or claiming expressly or impliedly that a casket is required by law, or failing to make available to such customer an alternative container; e. to misrepresent the law, public health necessity or religious requirements including the legal and health necessities for embalming, a casket, or an outer interment receptacle; f. to make false preservative value claims, including claiming that decomposition or decay of a deceased human body can be prevented by the use or purchase of embalming, a casket, a burial vault or other outer interment receptacle; g. to charge in excess of the amount advanced, paid or owed to third parties on behalf of customers, or not passing along to the customer any discount, rebate or other benefit received from third parties for any items of service or merchandise described as cash advances, cash disbursements, accommodations, or words of similar import. § 20-734 Merchandise and service selection. It shall be unlawful for any provider of funeral services: a. to fail to display the three least expensive caskets offered for sale in the same general manner as other caskets are displayed, provided that if fewer than twelve caskets are displayed, only the least expensive casket must be so displayed; or b. to interfere with the customer's selection of merchandise or services offered for sale including: (1) representing in any manner that any funeral merchandise or service is offered for sale when such is not a bona fide offer to sell said product or services, (2) falsely discouraging any purchase by disparagement, by suggestion that any merchandise or service is not readily available or by defacement, (3) disparaging concern for price by suggestion that a customer's concern for price or desire to save money on merchandise or services is improper, inappropriate or indicative of a lack of respect or affection for the deceased, (4) contradicting, mitigating or detracting from the printed disclosures required by section 20-732 of this subchapter, or (5) making any claim that is false, misleading or unsubstantiated in a material respect regarding any merchandise or services. § 20-735 Interference with the market. It shall be unlawful for any provider of funeral services to directly or indirectly prohibit, hinder or restrict, or attempt to prohibit, hinder or restrict: a. the offering or advertising of the availability of low-cost funerals, immediate cremation or other forms of disposition, or arrangement for funeral services in advance of need by any provider of funeral services, memorial society, or other person, partnership, association or corporation; b. any contract or arrangement between a memorial society and any provider of funeral services; c. the disclosure of accurate price information in any manner regarding funeral merchandise or services by any provider of funeral services. § 20-736 Price information over telephone. Any provider of funeral services shall, upon request, provide over the telephone,information regarding the range of prices and shall affirmatively disclose the availability of a presentation sheet at the establishment. § 20-737 Regulations. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter. § 20-738 Penalties. Violation of any provision of this subchapter shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not less than one hundred nor more than one thousand dollars for each violation. Subchapter 8: Income Tax Preparers § 20-739 Definitions. 1. For the purposes of this subchapter, the term tax preparer or preparer means a person, partnership, corporation or other business entity, that for valuable consideration advises or assists or offers to advise or assist in the preparation of income tax returns for another. 2. For the purposes of this subchapter, the term refund anticipation loan means any loan a taxpayer may receive against his or her anticipated income tax refund. § 20-740 Disclosure. a. A tax preparer who is required, pursuant to federal, state or local law or regulation, to sign income tax returns as a preparer shall prominently and conspicuously post on the business premises an identification and qualification statement. The statement shall include, but is not limited to, the name of the tax preparer, an address and phone number at which the tax preparer can be contacted throughout the year, and a statement of any qualifications possessed by the tax preparer, which may include a statement of satisfactory completion of an educational or training program in income tax law, theory or practice by the preparer. b. The tax preparer shall provide the customer with a receipt containing an address and phone number at which the preparer can be contacted throughout the year. § 20-740.1 Consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers. a. No later than the fifteenth of October of each year, the department shall produce and publish in the city record a one page informational flier regarding consumers' rights and laws concerning tax preparers to be called a consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers. The flier shall be in a form which is easily reproducible by photocopy machine and shall contain information including, but not limited to, the following: 1. Postings required by local, state and federal laws, such as price posting, posting of qualifications, and any licenses and permits required for the operation of the business; and 2. Explanations of some of the commonly offered services and industry jargon, such as preparation of short and long federal forms, refund, electronic filing, express mail, direct deposit, refund anticipation loan, quick, instant, rapid, fast, fee, and interest; and 3. Basic information on what a tax preparer is and is not required to do for a consumer, such as the preparer's responsibility to sign a return, that a tax preparer may not be required to accompany a consumer to an audit but the company may have a voluntary policy to accompany consumers to audits; and 4. The telephone numbers of the department for information and complaints; and 5. A statement that the consumer has the right to receive the following information from the tax preparer prior to becoming obligated to compensate such tax preparer for services rendered in connection with filing such consumer's income tax return with the appropriate governmental agencies: (a) A written list of the refund and tax preparation services offered by the tax preparer; (b) A written estimate of the total costs to the consumer for each refund and tax preparation service offered by the tax preparer. Such an estimate shall include basic filing fees, interest rates, refund anticipation loan processing fees, and any other related fees or charges; (c) A written interest rate estimation for a refund anticipation loan or any other loan services offered by the tax preparer; and (d) For each refund and tax preparation service offered by the tax preparer, a written estimate of the period of time the consumer can reasonably expect to wait for his or her tax refund. b. The department shall publicize the availability of the flier. The department shall provide a copy of the consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers to any requesting individuals or businesses within fourteen days of such a request and shall, no later than November 1 of each year, send the consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers to each tax preparer who has been found to be in violation of this subchapter or any other provision of this chapter within the previous calendar year. In addition, each tax preparer subject to this subchapter shall obtain a current consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers from the department and shall reproduce it so that it is clear and legible. As of January 1 of each year, each such tax preparer shall give to each consumer, free of charge, a current, legible copy of the consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers prior to any discussion with the consumer. Each such tax preparer shall also verbally direct the consumer to review the consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers and shall answer any questions the consumer may have about its contents. § 20-741 Records. No tax preparer shall intentionally misstate or misrepresent any information relating to his or her education, training or experience on an identification and qualification statement. A tax preparer shall maintain records to substantiate all of the information contained on such a statement; provided, however, that an affidavit signed by the tax preparer indicating that the information contained on a statement is true shall be sufficient to substantiate any information if other records are not available. Such records and/or affidavit shall be kept on file on the business premises and shall be presented on demand for inspection by the commissioner. § 20-741.1 Refund anticipation loans. 1. Any tax preparer who advertises the availability of a refund anticipation loan may not directly or indirectly represent such a loan as a refund. Any advertisement which mentions a refund anticipation loan must state conspicuously that it is a loan and that a fee or interest will be charged by the lending institution. The advertisement must also disclose the name of the lending institution. 2. Before any taxpayer enters into a refund anticipation loan, the tax preparer facilitating such loan shall provide the following disclosure to the taxpayer in writing, in English and Spanish, in at least 14-point type. In the event that the taxpayer does not understand English or Spanish, the tax preparer shall also provide a point-by-point oral explanation of the following required disclosure in a language understood by the tax payer: ∙ YOU ARE NOT REQUIRED TO ENTER INTO THIS REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN AGREEMENT MERELY BECAUSE YOU HAVE RECEIVED THIS INFORMATION. ∙ IF YOU DO SIGN A CONTRACT FOR A REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN, YOU WILL BE TAKING OUT A LOAN. YOU WILL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR REPAYMENT OF THE ENTIRE LOAN AMOUNT AND ALL RELATED COSTS AND FEES, REGARDLESS OF HOW MUCH MONEY YOU ACTUALLY RECEIVE IN YOUR TAX REFUND. ∙ IF YOU DO NOT TAKE OUT THIS REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN, YOU ARE ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE A GROSS TAX REFUND OF APPROXIMATELY $___ [insert amount]. ∙ IF YOU DO TAKE OUT THIS REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN, YOU WILL BE RESPONSIBLE TO PAY $___ [insert amount] IN FEES FOR THE LOAN. AFTER THESE FEES ARE PAID, YOU WILL RECEIVE APPROXIMATELY $___ [insert amount] AS YOUR LOAN. ∙ THE ESTIMATED ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE OF YOUR REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN IS [insert amount]%. THIS IS BASED ON THE ACTUAL AMOUNT OF TIME YOU WILL BE LENT MONEY THROUGH THIS REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN. ∙ IF YOU DO TAKE OUT THIS REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN, YOU CAN EXPECT TO RECEIVE YOUR LOAN WITHIN APPROXIMATELY TWO BUSINESS DAYS OF [insert date]. ∙ IF YOU DO NOT TAKE OUT THIS REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN, YOU CAN STILL RECEIVE YOUR TAX REFUND QUICKLY. IF YOU FILE YOUR TAX RETURN ELECTRONICALLY AND RECEIVE YOUR TAX REFUND THROUGH THE MAIL, YOU CAN EXPECT TO RECEIVE YOUR REFUND WITHIN APPROXIMATELY TWO BUSINESS DAYS OF [insert date]. IF YOU FILE YOUR TAX RETURN ELECTRONICALLY AND HAVE YOUR TAX REFUND DIRECTLY DEPOSITED INTO A BANK ACCOUNT, YOU CAN EXPECT TO RECEIVE YOUR REFUND WITHIN APPROXIMATELY TWO BUSINESS DAYS OF [insert date]. It shall be the obligation of the tax preparer to complete the required disclosure accurately with all relevant information for each taxpayer, to provide the required point-by-point oral explanation when necessary, and to ensure that the completed disclosure form is signed by the taxpayer before he or she enters into a refund anticipation loan. § 20-742 Exemptions. Apart from 20-741.1 and the accompanying penalties as listed in § 20-743, the provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to: a. An officer or employee of a corporation or business enterprise who, in his or her capacity as such, advises or assists in the preparation of income tax returns relating to such corporation or business enterprise. b. An attorney at law who advises or assists in the preparation of income tax returns in the practice of law and the employees thereof. c. A fiduciary and the employees thereof who advised or assist in the preparation of income tax returns on behalf of the fiduciary estate, the testator, trustee, grantor or beneficiaries thereof. d. A certified public accountant and the employees thereof. e. A public accountant licensed pursuant to the education law and the employees thereof. f. An employee of a governmental unit, agency or instrumentality who advises or assists in the preparation of income tax returns in the performance of his or her official duties. g. An agent enrolled to practice before the internal revenue service pursuant to section 10.4 of subpart A of 31 CFR part 10. § 20-743 Penalties. Any person, partnership, corporation or other business entity who violates any provision of this subchapter or any of the regulations promulgated hereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than five hundred dollars for the first violation and for each succeeding violation a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars; except that a person, partnership, corporation or other business entity shall not be subject to the civil penalty described above for a first-time violation of subdivision a of section 20-740 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person, partnership, corporation or other business entity proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person, partnership, corporation or other business entity who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of subdivision a of section 20-740 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person, partnership, corporation or other business entity may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person or entity has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. 1 Civil cause of action. Any person claiming to be injured by the failure of a tax preparer to act in accordance with section 20-741.1 of this subchapter shall have a cause of action against such tax preparer in any court of competent jurisdiction for any or all of the following relief: a. compensatory and punitive damages; b. injunctive and declaratory relief; c. attorneys' fees and costs; and d. such other relief as a court may deem appropriate. Subchapter 9: Sale of Travel Tickets Repealed. § 20-744 Procurement or sale of tickets, reservations or passenger accommodations. Repealed. Subchapter 10: Information Regarding Redemption of Beverage Containers § 20-745 Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter the following terms shall have the following meanings: a. Beverage means any beverage covered by title ten of article twenty- seven of the environmental conservation law of the state of New York; b. Beverage container means any can, bottle or other container of any description that is covered by title ten of article twenty-seven of the environmental conservation law of the state of New York; c. Dealer means any person engaged in the retail sale, for off-premises consumption of beverages in beverage containers that are covered by title ten of article twenty-seven of the environmental conservation law of the state of New York; d. Redeemer means any person, other than a dealer or distributor, who demands the refund value in exchange for an empty beverage container. § 20-746 Sign required. Every dealer shall post conspicuously a sign that summarizes the rights and obligations of redeemers pursuant to title ten of article twenty-seven of the environmental conservation law of the state of New York. § 20-747 Regulations. The commissioner may adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter. Such regulations shall include, but not be limited to, defining the contents, size and location of the sign required by section 20-746 of this subchapter. § 20-748 Penalties. Violation of this subchapter, or any regulation promulgated pursuant to it, shall be punishable by payment of a civil penalty of one hundred fifty dollars; except that a person shall not be subject to a civil penalty described above for a first-time violation of section 20-746 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder or pursuant to section 20-747, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-746 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. (a) Current selling price means the regular price of a listed service, so that, in the absence of any special offer, the service would be given upon payment of the listed price. (b) Service means a basic service performed by a retail service establishment. It also means any special service not commonly offered by such an establishment which the establishment offers to distinguish itself from its competitors. (c) Retail service establishment shall mean any establishment which provides services to consumers at retail, and shall include but not be limited to the following: tailors, dry cleaners, laundries, barbers and hair salons, nail salons, shoe and luggage repair shops, locksmiths, electrical or electronic appliance or equipment repair shops, reupholstery or furniture repair shops, tax preparers and photographic film development providers. § 20-750 Display of service prices. (a) Every retail service establishment must post, at each counter or desk at which orders are placed and/or payment is made, a list conspicuously displaying the current selling price of the basic services provided. The list shall also disclose factors which may cause the price to be higher than the basic price, and the range of the possible additional charges when such variables pertain. (b) In the event of a special sale or promotion, the regular price list shall remain conspicuously visible. c. Notwithstanding any other law, rule or regulation, and in addition to any other penalties provided in this code or elsewhere, the disclosure of differing prices or fees based upon gender by a retail service establishment shall constitute a violation of this subchapter. § 20-751 Disclosure of base prices. (a) Where the price of the service is calculated on a base fee plus labor and parts as determined by time and cost of materials, the base fee and the cost of labor per common unit of time shall be listed, and the list shall state that the cost of parts will be additional. The list shall also state that warranty information is available on request. (b) Where the cost of service includes the cost of parts, the service establishment shall provide a list of parts actually provided and the cost of each. § 20-752 Regulations. (a) The commissioner shall promulgate such regulations as shall be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter, including, but not limited to requirements as to the manner of display of service prices. (b) The commissioner may, by regulation, permit a printed list to be substituted for a posted list, in such classes of service establishments in which the commissioner determines that it would be impracticable to post because the list is subject to frequent changes, provided that the printed list is given to each customer upon entering the service establishment. § 20-753 Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this subchapter or the regulations promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a civil penalty of fifty dollars for the first offense; one hundred dollars for the second offense; and two hundred fifty dollars for the third offense and any subsequent offense; except that a person shall not be subject to the civil penalty described above for a first-time violation of section 20-750 or 20-751 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder or pursuant to section 20-753, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-750 or 20-751 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder or pursuant to section 20-753. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. For the purposes of this section, if on any single day the current selling price list is not displayed in accordance with this subchapter or the regulations promulgated pursuant to this subchapter, it shall be considered a single violation. Repealed. § 20-756 Consumer invoices; required disclosure. Repealed. § 20-757 Unsolicited offers. Repealed. § 20-758 Violations. Repealed. Subchapter 13: Tobacco Product Promotion § 20-760 Tobacco product promotion restriction. a. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or cause to be offered a tobacco product promotion, as defined in section 27-508.2 of this code, to any person younger than eighteen years of age. b. Any person offering or causing to be offered a tobacco product promotion shall verify through a driver's license or other photographic identification card issued by a government entity or educational institution that a person to whom a tobacco product promotion has been offered is at least eighteen years of age. Such identification need not be required of any individual who reasonably appears to be at least twenty-five years of age; provided, however, that such appearance shall not constitute a defense in any proceeding alleging the offering of a tobacco product promotion to an individual under eighteen years of age. c. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty pursuant to this subchapter shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation which shall be returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The administrative tribunal of the department shall have the power to impose civil penalties for violation of this subchapter. d. Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to prohibit sponsorship of or at events as set forth in section 27-508.5 of this code. Subchapter 13-A: Motorized Scooters § 20-762 Motorized scooters. a. For purposes of this section, a motorized scooter shall have the definition set forth in section 19-176.2 of this code. b. No person shall sell, lease or rent or attempt to sell, lease or rent a motorized scooter to another person in the city of New York. c. Any person who violates subdivision b of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of one thousand dollars for a first violation and a civil penalty of two thousand dollars for each subsequent violation within one year. Each sale, lease or rental, or attempt to sell, lease or rent, a motorized scooter shall be deemed a separate violation. Authorized employees of the department, the police department, and of any other agency designated by the mayor, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this section. Such penalties shall be recovered in a civil action or in a proceeding commenced by the service of a notice of hearing that shall be returnable before the administrative tribunal of the department. In addition, such violation shall be a traffic infraction and shall be punishable in accordance with section eighteen hundred of the New York state vehicle and traffic law. d. Any motorized scooter that has been used or is being used in violation of the provisions of this section may be impounded and shall not be released until any and all removal charges and storage fees and the applicable fines have been paid or a bond has been posted in an amount satisfactory to the commissioner. Subchapter 14: Domestic Workers and Household Employees § 20-770 Application. The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all employment agencies, as defined in section 171 of article 11 of the general business law, which arrange employment for domestic or household employees. § 20-771 Statement of employee rights and employer obligations under city, state and federal law. a. Every licensed employment agency under the jurisdiction of the commissioner and engaged in the job placement of domestic or household employees shall provide to each applicant for employment as a domestic or household employee and his or her prospective employer, before job placement is arranged, a written statement indicating the rights of such employee and the obligations of his or her employer under city, state and federal law. Such statement of rights and obligations shall embody provisions of city, state and federal laws that pertain to domestic or household employees, both in their capacity as workers in New York city, New York state and the United States and in their capacity specifically as domestic or household employees in New York city, New York state and the United States. Such statement of rights and obligations shall include, but not be limited to, a general description of employee rights and employer obligations pursuant to laws regarding minimum wage, overtime and hours of work, sick time, days of rest, record keeping, social security payments, unemployment insurance coverage, disability insurance coverage and workers' compensation. Such statement of rights and obligations shall be prepared and distributed by the commissioner to licensed employment agencies over which the commissioner has jurisdiction. b. Every employment agency engaged in the job placement of domestic or household employees shall keep on file in its principal place of business for a period of three (3) years a statement, signed by the employer of a domestic or household employee whom the employment agency has placed with such employer, indicating that the employer has read and understands the statement of rights and obligations he or she received pursuant to subdivision (a) of this section. § 20-772 Statement of job conditions; records. a. Every licensed employment agency under the jurisdiction of the commissioner and engaged in the job placement of domestic or household employees shall provide to each applicant for employment as a domestic or household employee a written statement, in a form approved by the commissioner, of the job conditions of each potential employment position to which the agency recommends that the applicant apply. Each such statement shall fully and accurately describe the nature and terms of employment, including the name and address of the person to whom the applicant is to apply for such employment, the name and address of the person authorizing the hiring for such position, wages, hours of work, the kind of services to be performed and agency fee. b. Every employment agency engaged in the job placement of domestic or household employees shall keep on file in its principal place of business for a period of three (3) years a duplicate copy of the written statement of job conditions required by subdivision (a) of this section. § 20-773 Enforcement. In order to implement and carry out the requirements of this subchapter, the commissioner or his or her duly authorized agent or inspector shall have the same authority as set forth in section 189 of article 11 of the general business law. § 20-774 Violations. Any person who violates, and the officers of a corporation and stockholders holding ten percent or more of the stock of a corporation which is not publicly traded, who knowingly permit the corporation to violate, subdivisions (a) and (b) of sections 20-771 and 20- 20-772 of this subchapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both, by any court of competent jurisdiction. Criminal proceedings based upon violations of such subdivisions may be instituted by the commissioner and/or any persons aggrieved by such violations. Subchapter 14-A: Immigration Assistance Services § 20-775 Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: a. Immigration assistance service means providing any form of assistance, in the city of New York, for a fee or other compensation, to persons who have come, or plan to come to the United States from a foreign country, or their representatives, in relation to any proceeding, filing or action affecting the non-immigrant, immigrant or citizenship status of a person, which arises under the immigration and nationality law, executive order or presidential proclamation, or which arises under actions or regulations of the United States department of homeland security, the United States department of justice, the United States department of labor, or the United States department of state. b. Provider means any person, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, sole proprietorship or natural person, that provides immigration assistance services, but shall not include: 1. any person who is a member in good standing of the bar of the highest court of any state, possession, territory, commonwealth or the District of Columbia, and is not under any order of any court suspending, enjoining, restraining, disbarring, or otherwise restricting him or her in the practice of law, or any person working directly under the supervision of the person admitted; 2. any tax-exempt, not-for-profit organization that provides immigration assistance services without a fee or other payment from individuals or at nominal fees as defined by the United States department of justice and any employee of such organization acting within the scope of his or her employment; 3. any tax-exempt, not-for-profit organization recognized by the United States department of justice that provides immigration assistance services via representatives accredited by the department to appear before the United States citizenship and immigration services and/or executive office for immigration review, that does not charge a fee or charges nominal fees as defined by the department, and any duly accredited employee of such organization acting within the scope of his or her employment; 4. any authorized agency under subdivision ten of section three hundred seventy-one of the New York state social services law and the employees of such organization when acting within the scope of such employment; 5. any elected official who, acting within the scope of his or her official capacity, without a fee or other payment makes inquiries on behalf of an individual to any governmental authority responsible for administering any program, law or regulation affecting the non-immigrant, immigrant or citizenship status of a person; 6. any employee of the office of the mayor or an executive agency of the city of New York who, acting within the scope of his or her capacity as an employee of the office of the mayor or an executive agency of the city of New York, without a fee or other payment makes inquires on behalf of an individual to any governmental authority responsible for administering any program, law or regulation affecting the non-immigrant, immigrant or citizenship status of a person; or 7. any individual providing representation in an immigration-related proceeding under federal law for which federal law or regulation establishes such individual's authority to appear. § 20-776 Prohibited conduct. In the course of providing immigration assistance services, no provider may: a. State or imply that the provider can or will obtain special favors from or has special influence with any governmental entity, or threaten to report the customer to immigration or other authorities or threaten to undermine in any way the customer's immigration status or attempt to secure lawful status; b. Demand or retain any fees or compensation for services not performed, or costs that are not actually incurred; c. Fail to provide a customer with copies of documents submitted to, or received from, a governmental entity within two weeks of submission or receipt or refuse to return original documents supplied by, prepared on behalf of, or paid for by the customer, upon the request of the customer, or upon termination of the contract. Original documents must be returned promptly upon request and upon cancellation of the contract, even if there is a fee dispute between the provider and the customer; d. Fail to provide the customer with a signed form affirming receipt of an original document, as well as a complete copy of such document, immediately upon taking possession of such original document for submission or any other purpose; e. Assume, use or advertise the title of lawyer or attorney at law, or equivalent terms in the English language or any other language, or represent or advertise other titles or credentials, including but not limited to Notary Public, Accredited Representative of the Board of Immigration Appeals, Notario Public, Notario Publico, Notario, Immigration Specialist or Immigration Consultant, that could cause a customer to believe that the person is authorized to provide advice on an immigration matter; provided that a notary public licensed by the secretary of state may use the term Notary Public; f. Give any legal advice concerning an immigration matter, including selecting, or advising the customer on selecting, a governmental agency form in order to apply for an immigration-related benefit, or otherwise engage in the practice of law; g. Make a determination of, or advise about, a person's immigration status, including advising him or her on how to respond to questions on a governmental form regarding such determination; h. Make any guarantee or promise to a customer, unless there is a basis in fact for such representation, such representation does not relate to eligibility for an immigration-related benefit, and the guarantee or promise is in writing and attached to the service contract; i. Represent that a fee may be charged, or charge a fee for the distribution, provision or submission of any official document or form issued or promulgated by a state or federal governmental entity; or for a referral of the customer to another person or entity that is qualified to provide services or assistance which the provider will not provide; j. Refer, for a fee or other compensation, a customer to an attorney or any other individual or entity that can provide services that such provider cannot provide; k. Guarantee the expedition of any immigration-related benefit, pursuant to an actual or fabricated relationship with or access to government employees who have the ability to expedite applications or other documentation, or issue a favorable decision for any reasons other than the merits of such application or documentation; l. Provide information to any person about his or her, or his or her family member's potential eligibility for a particular immigration-related benefit or status, or other governmental benefit, with the intent to induce such person to employ the services of such provider, regardless of whether the information is true or false; m. Disclose any information to, or submit any forms or documents with, any third party, including immigration or other authorities, on behalf of or relating to the customer without the knowledge and consent of the customer except where such disclosure or such submission is required by law. A provider shall notify the customer in writing when such provider has disclosed any information to or submitted any form or document with immigration or other authorities when such disclosure or submission was required by law and performed without the knowledge and consent of the customer. § 20-777 Written agreement. No immigration assistance services shall be provided until the customer has executed a written contract with the provider. The contract shall be in a language understood by the customer, either alone or with the assistance of an interpreter, and, if that language is not English, an English language version of the contract must also be provided. A copy of the contract shall be provided to the customer immediately upon the customer's execution of the contract. The interpreter shall provide an attestation affirming the accuracy of the translation, to be attached to the contract. The customer has the right to cancel the contract within three business days after his or her execution of the contract, without fee or penalty. The right to cancel the contract within three days without payment of any fee may be waived when services must be provided immediately to avoid a forfeiture of eligibility or other loss of rights or privileges, and the customer furnishes the provider with a separate dated and signed statement, by the customer or his or her representative, describing the need for services to be provided within three days and expressly acknowledging and waiving the right to cancel the contract within three days. The contract may be cancelled at any time after execution. If the contract is cancelled more than three days after execution, or within three days after execution if the right to cancel without fee has been waived, the provider may retain fees for services rendered, and any additional amounts actually expended on behalf of the customer. All other amounts must be returned to the customer within fifteen days after cancellation. The written contract shall be in plain language, in at least twelve point font and shall include the following: 1. The name, address and telephone number of the provider. 2. Itemization of all services to be provided to the customer, as well as the fees and costs to be charged to the customer for each service. 3. A statement that original documents submitted in connection with an application for an immigration-related benefit made to any governmental entity, may not be retained by the provider for any reason, including the customer's failure to pay fees or costs. 4. A statement that the provider shall give the customer a signed form affirming receipt of each original document, as well as a complete copy of such document, immediately upon taking possession of such original document for submission or any other purpose. 5. A statement that the provider shall give the customer a copy of each document prepared with the provider's assistance. 6. A statement that the customer is not required to obtain supporting documents through the provider, and may obtain such documents himself or herself, along with the statement: The U.S. government provides information on required forms and documentation for free online and by phone. 7. The statement: You may cancel this contract at any time. You have three (3) business days to cancel this contract without penalty and get back any fees that you have already paid. Notice of cancellation may be made by completing the cancellation form included in this contract, or by otherwise notifying the provider in writing and delivering such form or notification to the provider in person or by United States mail to (specify address). If you cancel this contract you will get back any documents you submitted to the provider. 8. Each contract shall contain a separate final page titled Cancellation Form. The cancellation form shall contain the following statement: I hereby cancel the contract of (date of contract) between (name of provider, address of provider, and phone number of provider) and (name of customer). Below the statement shall be a customer signature and date line. Below the signature and date line, the form shall contain the statement required by this paragraph, printed in 12 point font or larger. 9. A statement that the provider has financial surety in effect for the benefit of any customer in the event that the customer is owed a refund, or is damaged by the actions of the provider, together with the name, address and telephone number of the surety. 10. The statement: The individual providing assistance to you under this contract is not an attorney licensed to practice law or accredited by the United States department of justice to provide representation to you before the federal government or any immigration authority and may not give legal advice or accept fees for legal advice. For a free legal referral call the Office for New Americans hotline at (phone number of the Office for New Americans), the New York State Office of the Attorney General (phone number of the Office of the Attorney General), or your local district attorney or prosecutor. The provider shall be responsible for providing the most recent and accurate information required by this paragraph. 11. The statement: The individual providing assistance to you under this contract is prohibited from disclosing any of your personal information to, or submitting any forms or documents on your behalf with, immigration or other authorities without your knowledge and consent except as required by law. A provider shall promptly notify the customer in writing when such provider has disclosed any information to or submitted any form or document with immigration or other authorities when such disclosure or submission was required by law and done without the knowledge and consent of the customer. 12. The statement: A copy of all forms completed and documents accompanying the forms shall be kept by the service provider for three years. A copy of the customer's file shall be provided to the customer on demand and without fee. 13. On the same page as the signature line, the statement: The individual providing assistance to you under the terms of this contract must explain the contents of this contract to you and answer any questions you may have regarding the terms of this contract. 14. Each contract shall contain the department's publicly available Consumer Bill of Rights on a separate page. The provider shall be responsible for providing the most recent version of the document available on the department's website. § 20-777.1 Posting of signs. a. A provider must post signs conspicuously at every location where that provider meets with customers. Such signs shall be made available by the department in English and in the top six limited English proficiency languages spoken by the population of New York city as determined by the department of the city planning and the office of the language services coordinator, based on United States census data. Providers shall post such signs in English and in any language in which services are offered by the provider. To the extent the department has made available a sign in a language required to be posted by such provider, such provider must use such sign. There shall be a separate sign for each language, and each sign shall be posted in a location where it will be visible to customers. Such signs shall state the following: THE INDIVIDUAL PROVIDING ASSISTANCE TO YOU UNDER THIS CONTRACT IS NOT AN ATTORNEY LICENSED TO PRACTICE LAW OR ACCREDITED BY THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE TO PROVIDE REPRESENTATION TO YOU BEFORE THE UNITED STATES CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION SERVICES, THE EXECUTIVE OFFICE FOR IMMIGRATION REVIEW, THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY, THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE OR ANY IMMIGRATION AUTHORITIES AND MAY NOT GIVE LEGAL ADVICE OR ACCEPT FEES FOR LEGAL ADVICE. FOR A FREE LEGAL REFERRAL CALL THE OFFICE FOR NEW AMERICANS HOTLINE AT (PHONE NUMBER OF THE OFFICE FOR NEW AMERICANS). TO FILE A COMPLAINT ABOUT AN IMMIGRATION ASSISTANCE SERVICE PROVIDER CALL NEW YORK STATE OFFICE FOR NEW AMERICANS AT (PHONE NUMBER OF THE OFFICE FOR NEW AMERICANS), THE NEW YORK STATE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AT (PHONE NUMBER OF THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL), OR YOUR LOCAL DISTRICT ATTORNEY OR PROSECUTOR'S OFFICE AT (PHONE NUMBER OF THE DISTRICT ATTORNEY IN THE COUNTY WHERE THE PROVIDER PROVIDES SERVICES). The provider shall be responsible for providing the most recent and accurate information required by this section. A separate sign shall be posted in a location visible to customers in conspicuous size font and that contains the schedule of fees for services offered and the statement: YOU MAY CANCEL ANY CONTRACT WITHIN 3 BUSINESS DAYS AND GET BACK YOUR DOCUMENTS AND ANY MONEY YOU PAID. b. Signs required by this section must be at least 11 inches by 17 inches, in no less than 60 point font. § 20-777.2 Advertisements. a. Every provider who advertises immigration assistance services by signs, pamphlets, newspapers or any other means shall post or otherwise include with the advertisement a notice in English and in the language in which the advertisement appears. The notice must be of a conspicuous size and must state: The individual offering to provide immigration assistance services is not an attorney licensed to practice law or accredited by the United States department of justice to provide representation before the United States citizenship and immigration services, the executive office for immigration review, the department of homeland security, the department of justice, the department of labor, the department of state or any immigration authorities and may not give legal advice or accept fees for legal advice. b. No advertisement for immigration assistance services may expressly or implicitly guarantee any particular governmental action, including but not limited to the granting of employment authorization, lawful permanent resident status or citizenship. § 20-778 Document retention. Every provider shall retain copies of all documents prepared or obtained in connection with a customer's request for assistance for a period of three years after a written contract is executed by the provider and the customer, whether or not such contract is subsequently cancelled. § 20-779 Surety. Unless otherwise required by New York state law, every provider must maintain in full force and effect, for the entire period during which the provider provides immigration assistance services and for one year after the provider ceases to do business as a provider of immigration assistance services, a bond, contract of indemnity, or irrevocable letter of credit, payable to the people of the city of New York, in the principal amount of fifty thousand dollars. Such surety shall be for the benefit of any person who does not receive a refund of fees from the provider to which he or she is entitled, or is otherwise injured by the provider. The Commissioner on behalf of the person or the person in his or her own name may maintain an action against the provider and the surety. § 20-779.1 Penalties. a. (1) Criminal Penalties. Any provider who violates any provision of this subchapter shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor. (2) Civil Penalties. Any provider of immigration assistance services who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than five thousand dollars for the first violation and for each succeeding violation a civil penalty of not less than one thousand dollars nor more than ten thousand dollars. b. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation that shall be returnable to any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings. 2 Civil cause of action. Any person claiming to be injured by the failure of a provider of immigration assistance services to comply with the provisions of this subchapter shall have a cause of action against such provider of immigration assistance services in any court of competent jurisdiction for any or all of the following relief: a. actual compensatory and punitive damages or two thousand five hundred dollars, whichever is greater; b. injunctive and declaratory relief; c. attorney's fees and costs; and d. such other relief as a court deems appropriate. § 20-779.3 Rules. The commissioner may promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary for the purposes of implementing and carrying out the provisions of this subchapter. Upon a finding by the commissioner that the requirements of state law applicable to providers of immigration services are substantially the same as the requirements of this subchapter, compliance with state law shall be deemed to be compliance with the requirements of this subchapter. § 20-779.4 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this subchapter is, for any reason, declared unconstitutional or invalid, in whole or in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable, and such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this law, which shall continue in full force and effect. § 20-779.5 Reporting. a. In conjunction with the mayor's office of immigrant affairs, the department shall prepare and submit to the mayor and the speaker of the city council a report that includes the following information related to providers of immigration assistance services: 1. the number of complaints received related to providers of immigration assistance services, disaggregated by source and type; 2. the number of proactive investigations that do not stem from a complaint conducted by the department; 3. the number of violations issued, disaggregated by type; 4. the number of the violations issued that originated with a consumer complaint; 5. the number of violations issued as a result of a proactive investigation by the department; 6. the length of time the department required to investigate and determine whether to issue a violation for each complaint received; 7. a description of the department's efforts to proactively investigate providers of immigration assistance services; 8. a description of the department's efforts to collaborate with other law enforcement agencies on investigation, enforcement, and community education efforts; and 9. a description of changing trends in the provision of services and common fraudulent schemes. b. Such report shall be submitted on or before October 1, 2017 and every six months thereafter until the year 2020, and shall include the information required by subdivision a of this section as it relates to the six month period prior to the submission of such report. § 20-779.6 Community outreach and education. a. In conjunction with the mayor's office of immigrant affairs, the department shall engage in community outreach and education efforts to raise awareness about topics including but not limited to common fraudulent schemes committed by providers of immigration assistance services and the department's complaint mechanisms and services. § 20-779.7 Consumer bill of rights. a. In conjunction with the mayor's office of immigrant affairs, the department shall create a Consumer Bill of Rights for customers seeking assistance from providers of immigration assistance services. Such bill of rights shall be posted on the department's website in English, as well as in the top six limited English proficiency languages spoken by the population of New York city as determined by the department of the city planning and the office of the language services coordinator, based on United States census data. Subchapter 15: Payday Loans § 20-780 Definitions. a. Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, trust, association, corporation or other legal entity. This term shall not include any individual, firm, partnership, trust, association, corporation or other legal entity that accepts federally insured deposits, such as national banks, state- chartered banks, or savings and loan associations, or any individual, firm, partnership, trust, association, corporation or other legal entity regulated by or subject to the rules and regulations of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or Office of Thrift Supervision of the Department of the Treasury. b. Payday loan, also known as, among other terms, deferred deposit advances, cash on demand or cash advance, shall mean any transaction in which funds are provided to a consumer for a limited time period in exchange for (i) a consumer's personal check or share draft, in the amount of the funds provided to the consumer plus a fee, where presentment or negotiation of such check or share draft is deferred by agreement of the parties until a designated future date; or (ii) a consumer's authorization to debit the consumer's transaction account, in the amount of the funds provided to the consumer plus a fee, where such account will be debited on or after a designated future date. § 20-781 Disclosure of loan information. Before any consumer enters into a payday loan, the person offering, providing, or facilitating such loan shall provide to the consumer in writing all disclosure required pursuant to the federal Truth in Lending Act in addition to the following disclosure, in English and Spanish, in at least 20-point type: ∙ YOU ARE NOT REQUIRED TO ENTER INTO THIS PAYDAY LOAN AGREEMENT MERELY BECAUSE YOU HAVE RECEIVED THIS INFORMATION. ∙ IF YOU DO SIGN A CONTRACT FOR A PAYDAY LOAN, YOU WILL BE TAKING OUT A LOAN. YOU WILL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR REPAYMENT OF THE ENTIRE LOAN AMOUNT AND ALL RELATED COSTS AND FEES. ∙ IF YOU CANNOT PAY OFF THIS LOAN IN FULL, THE LENDER MIGHT NOT PERMIT YOU TO MAKE A PARTIAL PAYMENT. IN THAT SITUATION, YOU MAY BE REQUIRED TO TAKE OUT AN ADDITIONAL PAYDAY LOAN TO PAY OFF YOUR INITIAL DEBT. ∙ EACH TIME YOU EXTEND THIS PAYDAY LOAN OR TAKE OUT AN ADDITIONAL PAYDAY LOAN, YOU WILL BE CHARGED ADDITIONAL COSTS AND FEES. ∙ IF YOU DO TAKE OUT THIS PAYDAY LOAN, YOU WILL BE RESPONSIBLE TO PAY $___ [insert amount] IN FINANCE CHARGES FOR THE LOAN. AFTER THESE FINANCE CHARGES ARE PAID, YOU WILL RECEIVE APPROXIMATELY $___ [insert amount] AS YOUR LOAN. ∙ THE ESTIMATED ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE OF YOUR PAYDAY LOAN IS [insert amount]%. THIS IS THE COST OF YOUR CREDIT AT A YEARLY RATE. It shall be the obligation of the person offering, providing, or facilitating the payday loan to complete the required disclosure accurately with all relevant information for each consumer and to ensure that the completed disclosure form is signed by the consumer before he or she enters into the payday loan. § 20-782 Consumer information. Not later than the first day of February of the year two thousand and five and on a quarterly basis thereafter, not later than February first, May first, August first, and November first of each year, any person offering, providing, or facilitating a payday loan in New York city shall submit to the department and the council the residential zipcode of each consumer who lives within the city boundaries and has entered into a payday loan during the immediately preceding quarter. §20-783 Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than one thousand dollars for each violation. § 20-784 Hearing authority. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department shall be authorized upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for the violation of any provision of this subchapter. The department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose civil penalties not to exceed the amounts specified in section 20-783 of this subchapter for each such violation. All proceedings authorized pursuant to this subdivision shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. The remedies and penalties provided for in this subdivision shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. (2) All such proceedings shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. Subchapter 15: Disclosure of Information by Child Care Facilities. Repealed. § 20-800 Definitions. Repealed. § 20-801 Posting of information. Repealed. § 20-802 Informational materials. Repealed. § 20-803 Notice of violations. Repealed. § 20-804 Penalties. Repealed. § 20-805 Rules. Repealed. § 20-806 Severability. Repealed. Subchapter 16: Tenant Screening Report Disclosure § 20-807 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply: a. Application information means all information any prospective tenant or tenants is/are required to provide in connection with renting or leasing residential real property, the purpose of which is to gather information about such prospective tenant or tenants, including, but not limited to personal information such as names, addresses, contact information, social security numbers, employment history, rental history or other information pertinent to entering into a real estate tenancy agreement. b. Consumer reporting agency means any person who, for monetary fees, dues, or on a cooperative nonprofit basis, regularly engages in whole or in part in the practice of assembling or evaluating consumer credit information or other information on consumers for the purpose of furnishing consumer reports, tenant screening reports or other investigative consumer reports to third parties. c. Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or association. d. Tenant screening report means any written, oral, or other communication of any information by a consumer reporting agency bearing on a consumer's credit worthiness, credit standing, credit capacity, character, general reputation, personal characteristics, history of contact with any housing, civil or criminal court of any state, or mode of living, which is used or expected to be used or collected in whole or part for the purpose of serving as a factor in establishing a consumer's suitability for housing. § 20-808 Disclosure. a. Any person who requests application information directly from a prospective tenant or tenants or such tenant(s)' agent or agents shall disclose to the prospective tenant or tenants the following: (i) either: (1) that the application information provided by the prospective tenant or tenants may be used to obtain a tenant screening report and the name and address of the consumer reporting agency or agencies which will be used to obtain such report, or (2) that the application information provided will not be used to obtain a tenant screening report and that the person requesting such information, and his or her agent(s), do not use tenant screening reports to determine a prospective tenant or tenants' suitability for housing; and (ii) that pursuant to federal and state law: (1) if the person requesting the information takes adverse action against a prospective tenant or tenants on the basis of information contained in a tenant screening report, such person must notify the tenant that such action was taken and supply the name and address of the consumer reporting agency that provided the tenant screening report on the basis of which such action was taken; (2) any prospective tenant against whom adverse action was taken based on information contained in a tenant screening report has the right to inspect and receive a free copy of such report by contacting the consumer reporting agency; (3) every tenant or prospective tenant is entitled to one free tenant screening report from each national consumer reporting agency annually, in addition to a credit report that should be obtained from www.annualcreditreport.com and (4) every tenant or prospective tenant may dispute inaccurate or incorrect information contained in a tenant screening report directly with the consumer reporting agency. b. If application information is requested in writing, the statements required by subdivision a of this section shall be in writing, located immediately adjacent to where personal information is requested, and set off in a box and printed in a color that sharply contrasts with the print surrounding it. If application information is requested orally, the person requesting such information shall provide written copies of the statements required by subdivision a of this section. § 20-809 Posting of signs. a. Any person requesting application information from a prospective tenant or tenants shall post a sign, the form and manner of which shall be determined by rule of the commissioner, in any location at which the principal purpose is conducting business transactions pertaining to the rental of residential real estate properties. Such sign shall be posted in a location visible to potential subjects of such reports and shall disclose in conspicuous size type the name and address of all consumer reporting agencies used. Such sign shall also contain a statement that consumers are entitled to one free tenant screening report from each consumer reporting agency annually and may dispute inaccurate or incorrect information contained in such tenant screening report directly with the consumer reporting agency. b. A person requesting application information who has the right to rent or lease housing units in one building with five or fewer housing units that is owned and occupied by such person shall not be required to post a sign pursuant to subdivision a of this section in such building. § 20-810 Violations. A person violating sections 20-808 or 20-809 of this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than five hundred dollars for the first violation; except that a person shall not be subject to the civil penalty described above for a first-time violation of section 20-809 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-809 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. § 20-811 Hearing authority. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department shall be authorized, upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for the violation of any provision of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder. The department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose civil penalties not to exceed the amounts specified in section 20-810 of this subchapter for each such violation. All proceedings authorized pursuant to this section shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. The penalties provided for in section 20-810 of this subchapter shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. b. All proceedings under this subchapter shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. Subchapter 17: Pregnancy Services Centers § 20-815 Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: a. Abortion shall mean the termination of a pregnancy for purposes other than producing a live birth, which includes but is not limited to a termination using pharmacological agents. b. Client shall mean an individual who is inquiring about or seeking services at a pregnancy services center. c. Emergency contraception shall mean one or more prescription drugs used separately or in combination, to prevent pregnancy, when administered to or self-administered by a patient, within a medically recommended amount of time after sexual intercourse, and dispensed for that purpose in accordance with professional standards of practice and determined by the United States food and drug administration to be safe. d. Health information shall mean any oral or written information in any form or medium that relates to health insurance and/or the past, present or future physical or mental health or condition of a client. e. Licensed medical provider shall mean a person licensed or otherwise authorized under the provisions of articles one hundred thirty-one, one hundred thirty-one-a, one hundred thirty-one-b, one hundred thirty-nine or one hundred forty of the education law of New York, to provide medical services. f. Personal information shall mean any or all of the following: the name, address, phone number, email address, date of birth, social security number, driver's license number or non-driver photo identification card number of a client, a relative of a client or a sexual partner of a client. This term shall apply to all such data, notwithstanding the method by which such information is maintained. g. Pregnancy services center shall mean a facility, including a mobile facility, the primary purpose of which is to provide services to women who are or may be pregnant, that either: (1) offers obstetric ultrasounds, obstetric sonograms or prenatal care; or (2) has the appearance of a licensed medical facility. Among the factors that shall be considered in determining whether a facility has the appearance of a licensed medical facility are the following: the pregnancy services center (a) offers pregnancy testing and/or pregnancy diagnosis; (b) has staff or volunteers who wear medical attire or uniforms; (c) contains one or more examination tables; (d) contains a private or semi-private room or area containing medical supplies and/or medical instruments; (e) has staff or volunteers who collect health insurance information from clients; and (f) is located on the same premises as a licensed medical facility or provider or shares facility space with a licensed medical provider. It shall be prima facie evidence that a facility has the appearance of a licensed medical facility if it has two or more of the factors listed in subparagraphs (a) through (f) of paragraph (2) of this subdivision. A pregnancy services center shall not include a facility that is licensed by the state of New York or the United States government to provide medical or pharmaceutical services or where a licensed medical provider is present to directly provide or directly supervise the provision of all services described in this subdivision that are provided at the facility. h. Premises shall mean land and improvements or appurtenances or any part thereof. i. Prenatal care shall mean services consisting of physical examination, pelvic examination or clinical laboratory services provided to a woman during pregnancy. Clinical laboratory services refers to the microbiological, serological, chemical, hematological, biophysical, cytological or pathological examination of materials derived from the human body, for purposes of obtaining information, for the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of disease or the assessment of health condition. § 20-816 Required disclosures. a. A pregnancy services center shall disclose to a client that the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene encourages women who are or who may be pregnant to consult with a licensed medical provider. b. A pregnancy services center shall disclose if it does or does not have a licensed medical provider on staff who provides or directly supervises the provision of all of the services at such pregnancy services center. c. A pregnancy services center shall disclose if it does or does not provide or provide referrals for abortion. d. A pregnancy services center shall disclose if it does or does not provide or provide referrals for emergency contraception. e. A pregnancy services center shall disclose if it does or does not provide or provide referrals for prenatal care. f. The disclosures required by this section must be provided: (1) in writing, in English and Spanish in a size and style as determined in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner on (i) at least one sign conspicuously posted in the entrance of the pregnancy services center; (ii) at least one additional sign posted in any area where clients wait to receive services; and (iii) in any advertisement promoting the services of such pregnancy services center in clear and prominent letter type and in a size and style to be determined in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner; and (2) orally, whether by in person or telephone communication, upon a client or prospective client request for any of the following services: (i) abortion; (ii) emergency contraception; or (iii) prenatal care. § 20-817 Confidentiality of health and personal information. a. All health information and personal information provided by a client in the course of inquiring about or seeking services at a pregnancy services center shall be treated as confidential and not disclosed to any other individual, company or organization unless such client, in writing, requests or consents to the release of such information, or disclosure is required by operation of law or court order. b. Any consent for the release of health or personal information required pursuant to subdivision a of this section must: (1) be in writing, dated and signed by the client; (2) identify the nature of the information to be disclosed; (3) identify the name and institutional affiliation of the person or class of persons to whom the information is to be disclosed; (4) identify the organization or individual who is to make the disclosure; (5) identify the client; (6) contain an expiration date or an expiration event that relates to the client or the purpose of the use or disclosure. c. Any client that consents to the release of health or personal information pursuant to subdivision b of this section must have a clear and complete understanding of the nature of such release and the content of such information. d. Notwithstanding subdivisions a and b of this section, if any pregnancy services center employee or volunteer has reasonable cause to suspect that a client receiving services at a pregnancy services center is an abused or maltreated child, such employee or volunteer may report such abuse to the statewide central register of child abuse and maltreatment in accordance with section four-hundred thirteen or four-hundred fourteen of the social services law of New York, and to the administration for children's services, and/or the police department, and cooperate in the investigation related thereto to the extent permitted by applicable state and federal law. For the purposes of this subdivision, abused child and maltreated child shall be defined in accordance with section four-hundred twelve of the social services law of New York, or as a person under the age of eighteen whose parent or guardian legally responsible for such person's care inflicts serious physical injury upon such person, creates a substantial risk of serious physical injury, or commits an act of sexual abuse against such person. Reporting child abuse and maltreatment as defined in this subdivision to an individual or entity other than the statewide central registrar of child abuse and maltreatment, the administration for children's services or the police department shall be a violation of this section. § 20-818 Penalties. a. Any pregnancy services center that violates the provisions of sections 20-816 or 20-817 of this subchapter or any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than two hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars for the first violation and a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than two thousand-five hundred dollars for each succeeding violation. b. (1) If any pregnancy services center is found to have violated the provisions of section 20-816 on three or more separate occasions within two years, then, in addition to imposing the penalties set forth in subdivision a of this section, the commissioner, after notice and a hearing, shall be authorized to order that the pregnancy services center be sealed for a period not to exceed five consecutive days, except that such premises may be entered with the permission of the commissioner solely for actions necessary to remedy past violations of section 20-816 or prevent future violations or to make the premises safe. For the purposes of this subdivision, any violations at a pregnancy services center shall not be included in determining the number of violations of any subsequently established pregnancy services center at that location unless the commissioner establishes that the subsequent operator of such pregnancy services center acquired the premises or pregnancy services center, in whole or in part, for the purpose of permitting the previous operator of the pregnancy services center who had been found guilty of violating section 20-816 of this subchapter to avoid the effect of such violations. (2) Orders of the commissioner issued pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision shall be posted at the premises that are the subject of the order (s). (3) Ten days after the posting of an order issued pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision, and upon the written directive of the commissioner, officers and employees of the department and officers of the New York city police department are authorized to act upon and enforce such orders. (4) A closing directed by the department pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision shall not constitute an act of possession, ownership or control by the city of the closed premises. (5) Mutilation or removal of a posted order of the commissioner or his designee shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding fifteen days, or both, provided such order contains therein a notice of such penalty. Any other intentional disobedience or resistance to any provision of the orders issued pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision, including using or occupying or permitting any other person to use or occupy any premises ordered closed without the permission of the department as described in subdivision b shall, in addition to any other punishment prescribed by law, be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both. c. For the purposes of this section, all violations committed on any one day by any one pregnancy services center shall constitute a single violation. § 20-819 Hearing authority. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department shall be authorized, upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for the violation of the provisions of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder. The department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose civil penalties not to exceed the amounts specified in section 20-818 of this subchapter for each such violation. All proceedings authorized pursuant to this section shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. The penalties provided for in section 20-818 of this subchapter shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. b. All proceedings under this subchapter shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. Notice of any third violation for engaging in a violation of section 20-816 shall state that premises may be ordered sealed after a finding of a third violation. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. § 20-820 Civil cause of action. Any person claiming to be injured by the failure of a pregnancy services center to comply with section 20-817 shall have a cause of action against such pregnancy services center in any court of competent jurisdiction for any or all of the following remedies: compensatory and punitive damages; injunctive and declaratory relief; attorney's fees and costs; and such other relief as a court deems appropriate. Subchapter 18: Prohibition on the Sale of Expired Over-the-Counter Medication § 20-821 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply: a. Over-the-counter medication means a drug, as defined by section 71.03 (b) of the New York city health code, which does not require a prescription. b. Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or association. § 20-822 Prohibited conduct and violations. a. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, any over-the-counter medication, later than the date, if any, marked upon the label as indicative of the date beyond which the contents cannot be expected to be safe and effective. b. Violations. A person violating section 20-822 of this subchapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars for the first violation and a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars for any subsequent violation. In addition to such penalties, any person who violates this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than two hundred and fifty dollars for the first violation and of not less than two hundred and fifty dollars nor more than five hundred dollars for each subsequent violation. For purposes of this subdivision, each group of identical over-the-counter medication subject to this subchapter marked with the same date shall constitute a single violation. However, where the expired over-the-counter medication is sold to a person, each sale shall constitute a separate violation under this section. Penalties shall be enforced in accordance with subdivision g of section twenty-two hundred and three of the charter of the city of New York. § 20-823 Enforcement. The department, the police department, and other agencies designated by the commissioner are authorized to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Subchapter 19: Conversion Therapy Prohibition Repealed. § 20-824 Definitions. Repealed. § 20-825 Prohibited conduct. Repealed. § 20-826 Enforcement. Repealed. § 20-827 Rules and regulations. Repealed. Subchapter 20: Required Disclosures by Bail Bond Agents § 20-830 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Bail bond business. The term bail bond business means any bail or insurance business, as described in subsection a of section 6801 of the insurance law. Bail bond agent. The term bail bond agent means any individual, corporation, or other entity that acts as an agent or solicitor of a bail bond business in soliciting, negotiating, or effectuating any deposit or bail bond by such bail bond business as referenced in subsection a of section 6802 of the insurance law. Designated citywide languages. The term designated citywide languages means the top six limited English proficiency languages spoken by the population of the city as determined, by the department of city planning and the office of the language services coordinator. Premium or compensation. The term premium or compensation means premium or compensation as this term is used in section 6804 of the insurance law. § 20-831 Disclosures related to bail bonds. a. The department shall produce a consumer bill of rights regarding bail bond agents. The department shall provide the consumer bill of rights in a downloadable format on the department's website in English and in the designated citywide languages. The consumer bill of rights shall include, but need not be limited to, the following information: 1. What bail bond businesses and agents are and how the process of obtaining a bail bond works; 2. What a bail bond agent is, and is not, required by law to do for a consumer; 3. How to make a complaint regarding a bail bond business or bail bond agent, including the contact information for the city and state agencies to which a complaint may be directed; 4. Explanations of the commonly offered services and commonly used industry terms, such as premium or compensation and collateral, including, but not limited to, the difference between nonrefundable premium or compensation and refundable collateral; 5. A list of the maximum premium or compensation that can be charged for giving bail bond or depositing money or property as bail under section 6804 of the insurance law, including examples of the maximum premium or compensation for common bail amounts; 6. A statement that a premium or compensation that exceeds the premium or compensation amounts permitted pursuant to section 6804 of the insurance law is illegal; 7. That a consumer may negotiate the terms of the bail bond contract and take the contract off the premises where a transaction occurs for review prior to signing; and that the contract shall disclose when collateral is to be returned and under which conditions such collateral may be kept by the bail bond agent; 8. That the consumer bill of rights is available upon request in the designated citywide languages; and 9. A statement that a consumer may be eligible for refundable cash bail. b. A bail bond agent shall post in a conspicuous manner at its business and where transactions are executed, in a size and style to be determined by the commissioner, a sign stating the following: 1. The license number of the bail bond agent; 2. The registered name of the bail bond agent; 3. All addresses and phone numbers registered under the license; and 4. The name of any sublicensee registered under the license. c. Before entering into a contract with a consumer, a bail bond agent shall produce and distribute to every consumer the consumer bill of rights, a copy of which shall be signed and dated by the consumer, and a flier containing the information described in subdivision b of this section. Such agent shall distribute such consumer bill of rights in English and, if the consumer is a limited English proficient individual who speaks a designated citywide language and such agent knows or reasonably should know that the consumer is such an individual, such agent shall distribute the consumer bill of rights in such language as well. d. All receipts and contracts provided to consumers by a bail bond agent shall include: 1. The name, license number, address, and phone number of the bail bond agent; 2. The amount of the bond, when it will be paid, and the name of the bail bond business that issued the bond; 3. A description of the collateral, when such collateral will be returned and under which conditions such collateral may be kept; 4. The amount of the premium or compensation; and 5. A statement of any money paid to a third party by the consumer and the purpose of such payment. e. Each bail bond agent shall provide to each consumer a copy of any document that the consumer signed, including but not limited to, any contract and the consumer bill of rights. f. A bail bond agent shall maintain physical or electronic copies of all receipts, contracts and signed copies of the consumer bill of rights for a period of five years and, upon request by the department, make such copies available for inspection in accordance with applicable law. g. A bail bond agent shall maintain records of the names of any persons employed or subcontracted to interact with consumers for a period of three years and, upon request by the department, make such records available for inspection in accordance with applicable law. § 20-832 Disclosure of premium or compensation for bail bond services. a. A bail bond agent shall post in a conspicuous manner, at the location where transactions are executed, a sign, to be produced by the department and made available online, that shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 1. A list of the maximum premium or compensation that can be charged for giving bail bond or depositing money or property as bail under section 6804 of the insurance law; 2. That such premium or compensation represents the maximum amounts, excluding collateral, that a bail bond agent can charge for services; 3. That a consumer is entitled to receive and must sign a consumer bill of rights before entering a contract with a bail bond agent; and 4. That a consumer may make a complaint to the department or the relevant state agencies as illustrated in the consumer bill of rights. b. The department shall make information available to inform consumers of their right to make a complaint to the department or the relevant state agencies when a bail bond agent charges more than the maximum premium or compensation permitted under section 6804 of the insurance law. § 20-833 Rules. The department is authorized to promulgate such rules as it deems necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this subchapter. § 20-835 Civil penalties. a. Any person that violates any provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated pursuant to this subchapter is liable for a civil penalty of not less than $500 nor more than $5,000 for each violation. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to this subchapter is returnable to any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or within any agency of the city designated to conduct such proceedings. b. A bail bond business that is party to a transaction in which a violation occurred shall be liable for any civil penalty imposed on a bail bond agent. Subchapter 21: Cashless Establishments Prohibited § 20-840 Cashless establishments prohibited. a. Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Cash. The term cash means United States coins and currency, including federal reserve notes. Cash does not include foreign currency; any paper instrument other than a federal reserve note, including, but not limited to, any check, bond, or promissory note; or any foreign metal coin. Consumer commodity. The term consumer commodity means any article, good, merchandise, product or commodity of any kind or class produced, distributed or offered for retail sale for consumption by individuals, or for personal, household or family purposes. Food store. The term food store means an establishment which gives or offers for sale food or beverages to the public for consumption or use on or off the premises, or on or off a pushcart, stand or vehicle. Retail establishment. The term retail establishment means an establishment wherein consumer commodities are sold, displayed or offered for sale, or where services are provided to consumers at retail. This definition does not include banks or trust companies as those terms are defined in section 2 of article 1 of the banking law. b. It shall be unlawful for a food store or a retail establishment to refuse to accept payment in cash from consumers, provided that such food store or retail establishment may refuse to accept payment: 1. In cash bills denominated above $20; or 2. In cash for any telephone, mail, or internet-based transaction, unless the payment for such transaction takes place on the premises of such food store or retail establishment. c. No food store or retail establishment shall charge a higher price for the same consumer commodity to a consumer who pays in cash than to a consumer who pays for such commodity through a cash-less transaction. d. A food store or retail establishment that violates this section is liable for a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for the first violation and a civil penalty of not more than $1500 for each subsequent violation. e. 1. This subchapter shall not apply to a food store or retail establishment that provides a device on premises that converts cash, without charging a fee or requiring a minimum deposit amount greater than one dollar, into a prepaid card that allows a consumer to complete a transaction at such food store or retail establishment. 2. Upon request, such device shall provide each consumer with a receipt indicating the amount of cash such consumer deposited onto the prepaid card. 3. Cash deposits onto such a prepaid card shall not be subject to an expiration date and there shall be no limit on the number of transactions that may be completed on such prepaid card. 4. In the event that such device malfunctions, the food store or retail establishment where such device is located shall accept payment in cash from consumers throughout the time period in which such device does not function in accordance with the standards set forth in this subchapter. Such food store or retail establishment shall place a conspicuous sign on or immediately adjacent to such device indicating that such food store or retail establishment is required by law to accept cash if such device malfunctions, and that consumers may report any violation to 311. The department may establish by rule additional requirements relating to such signs and the display of such signs. Subchapter 22: Third-Party Food Delivery Services. Repealed. § 20-845 Definitions. Repealed. § 20-846 Fees. Repealed. § 20-847 Telephone orders. Repealed. § 20-847.1 Telephone number listings. Repealed. § 20-847.2 Unauthorized listings. Repealed. § 20-847.3 Customer data. Repealed. § 20-848 Penalties and enforcement. Repealed. Subchapter 23: Hotel Service Disruptions § 20-850 Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Hotel. The term hotel means a transient hotel as defined in section 12-10 of the New York city zoning resolution or any successor provision of such resolution. Room. The term room means a room available or let out for use or occupancy in a hotel. Service disruption. The term service disruption means any of the following conditions where such condition substantially affects or is likely to substantially affect any guest's use of a room or utilization of a hotel service: (i) construction work in or directly related to the hotel that creates excessive noise that is substantially likely to disturb a guest, other than construction that is intended to correct an emergency condition or other condition requiring immediate attention; (ii) conditions of which the hotel is aware, indicating the presence in the hotel of any infestation by bed bugs, lice or other insects, rodents or other vermin capable of spreading disease or being carried, including on one's person, if such infestation has not been fully treated within 24 hours of identifying it; (iii) the unavailability, for a period of 48 hours or more, of any advertised hotel amenity, including, but not limited to, a pool, spa, shuttle service, internet access, or food and beverage service; (iv) the unavailability, for a period of 48 hours or more, of any advertised room appliances or technology, including but not limited to, in-room refrigerators, or internet or Wi-Fi services; (v) the unavailability of any advertised or legally required accessibility feature, including, but not limited to, an elevator, wheelchair lift, ramp, or accessible bathroom in such room or in any common area of the hotel; (vi) the unavailability for a period of 24 hours or more, of any utility, including, but not limited to, gas, water or electricity when the unavailability affects only the location of the hotel; or (vii) any strike, lockout or picketing activity, or other demonstration or event for a calendar day or more at or immediately adjacent to such hotel. Third-party vendor. The term third-party vendor means a vendor with which a hotel has an arrangement for third-party room reservations, or any other entity that has reserved or entered into an agreement or booking for the use or occupancy of one or more rooms in a hotel in furtherance of the business of reselling such rooms to guests. § 20-851 Notification. a. Within 24 hours of becoming aware of a service disruption, a hotel shall provide notification of such service disruption to each third-party vendor and each guest who has entered into a reservation, booking, or agreement with the hotel or a third-party vendor for the use or occupancy of a room where such service disruption could reasonably affect such room or such guest's stay or use of a hotel service. Such notification shall also be provided immediately before accepting or entering into any new reservation, booking, or agreement for the use or occupancy of a room or hotel service that could reasonably be affected by such service disruption. Such notification shall also be provided to any current guest who is substantially affected by such service disruption. Where the circumstances of such service disruption make timely notification impracticable, such notification shall be made as soon as practicable. b. Such notification shall describe: (i) the nature of the service disruption; and (ii) the extent of the service disruption's effect on reservations, bookings, or agreements to use or occupy such room or hotel services, including the right to cancel or terminate the reservation, booking, or agreement for the use or occupancy of such room or hotel services without the imposition of any fee, penalty or other charge, as provided in subdivisions c and d of this section. If such notification is included in a communication containing other information, the notification shall be in a significantly larger font and different color than the remainder of the communication. c. A hotel shall not impose any fee, penalty or other charge, nor retain any deposit, in the event a guest, prior to checking in, cancels a reservation, booking, or agreement with such hotel for the use or occupancy of a room, where such guest's stay or room could be substantially affected by a service disruption during such guest's stay or use of a hotel service, unless the hotel provided prominent and clear notice of such service disruption, pursuant to subdivision b of this section, prior to accepting such reservation, booking, or agreement. d. Where a service disruption arises only after any guest of such room has checked in, the hotel shall prominently and clearly notify such guest of such service disruption within 24 hours of becoming aware of such disruption, as provided in subdivision a of this section. Such notification shall specify the rights set forth in this subdivision, pursuant to subdivision b of this section. The guests of such room or hotel service may terminate any reservation, booking, or agreement for the rental of such room or use of a hotel service, and the hotel shall not impose any fee, penalty or other charge for such termination, nor retain any deposit related to any unused portion of the period of the reservation, booking, or agreement following the onset of such service disruption. § 20-852 Penalties. a. Authorized agents and employees of the department of consumer and worker protection, and of any other agency designated by the mayor, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. b. A hotel that violates or causes another person to violate a provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated pursuant to such subchapter, shall be subject to a civil penalty as follows: 1. for the first violation, a civil penalty of $500; 2. for the second violation issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a civil penalty of $1,000; 3. for the third violation issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a civil penalty of $2,500; and 4. for the fourth and each subsequent violation issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a civil penalty of $5,000. c. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty pursuant to this section shall be commenced by the service of a summons or notice of violation returnable to the office of administrative trials and hearings. § 20-853 Rules. The department, or any other agency designated by the mayor pursuant to section 20-852, may promulgate rules in furtherance of the implementation and enforcement of this subchapter. Subchapter 24: Car Rentals § 20-861 Reservations. A motor vehicle rental business that reserves vehicles for consumers shall conspicuously display a sign or notice on its business premises that informs consumers of their rights pertaining to such reservations. The commissioner shall establish the rights pertaining to such reservations, and the form and content of such sign or notice, by rule. § 20-862 Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of: (i) $150 for the first violation; (ii) $250 for the second violation; and (iii) $350 for the third and any subsequent violation; except that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first-time violation of section 20-861 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within 30 days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-861 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department's administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination. Subchapter 25: Automated Employment Decision Tools § 20-870 Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Automated employment decision tool. The term automated employment decision tool means any computational process, derived from machine learning, statistical modeling, data analytics, or artificial intelligence, that issues simplified output, including a score, classification, or recommendation, that is used to substantially assist or replace discretionary decision making for making employment decisions that impact natural persons. The term automated employment decision tool does not include a tool that does not automate, support, substantially assist or replace discretionary decision-making processes and that does not materially impact natural persons, including, but not limited to, a junk email filter, firewall, antivirus software, calculator, spreadsheet, database, data set, or other compilation of data. Bias audit. The term bias audit means an impartial evaluation by an independent auditor. Such bias audit shall include but not be limited to the testing of an automated employment decision tool to assess the tool's disparate impact on persons of any component 1 category required to be reported by employers pursuant to subsection (c) of section 2000e-8 of title 42 of the United States code as specified in part 1602.7 of title 29 of the code of federal regulations. Employment decision. The term employment decision means to screen candidates for employment or employees for promotion within the city. § 20-871 Requirements for automated employment decision tools. a. In the city, it shall be unlawful for an employer or an employment agency to use an automated employment decision tool to screen a candidate or employee for an employment decision unless: 1. Such tool has been the subject of a bias audit conducted no more than one year prior to the use of such tool; and 2. A summary of the results of the most recent bias audit of such tool as well as the distribution date of the tool to which such audit applies has been made publicly available on the website of the employer or employment agency prior to the use of such tool. b. Notices required. In the city, any employer or employment agency that uses an automated employment decision tool to screen an employee or a candidate who has applied for a position for an employment decision shall notify each such employee or candidate who resides in the city of the following: 1. That an automated employment decision tool will be used in connection with the assessment or evaluation of such employee or candidate that resides in the city. Such notice shall be made no less than ten business days before such use and allow a candidate to request an alternative selection process or accommodation; 2. The job qualifications and characteristics that such automated employment decision tool will use in the assessment of such candidate or employee. Such notice shall be made no less than 10 business days before such use; and 3. If not disclosed on the employer or employment agency's website, information about the type of data collected for the automated employment decision tool, the source of such data and the employer or employment agency's data retention policy shall be available upon written request by a candidate or employee. Such information shall be provided within 30 days of the written request. Information pursuant to this section shall not be disclosed where such disclosure would violate local, state, or federal law, or interfere with a law enforcement investigation. § 20-872 Penalties. a. Any person that violates any provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated pursuant to this subchapter is liable for a civil penalty of not more than $500 for a first violation and each additional violation occurring on the same day as the first violation, and not less than $500 nor more than $1,500 for each subsequent violation. b. Each day on which an automated employment decision tool is used in violation of this section shall give rise to a separate violation of subdivision a of section 20-871. c. Failure to provide any notice to a candidate or an employee in violation of paragraphs 1, 2 or 3 of subdivision b of section 20-871 shall constitute a separate violation. d. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized by this subchapter is returnable to any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or within any agency of the city designated to conduct such proceedings. § 20-873 Enforcement. The corporation counsel or such other persons designated by the corporation counsel on behalf of the department may initiate in any court of competent jurisdiction any action or proceeding that may be appropriate or necessary for correction of any violation issued pursuant this subchapter, including mandating compliance with the provisions of this chapter or such other relief as may be appropriate. § 20-874 Construction. The provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed to limit any right of any candidate or employee for an employment decision to bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction, or to limit the authority of the commission on human rights to enforce the provisions of title 8, in accordance with law. Subchapter 26: Disclosure of Total Ticket Costs in Advertisements § 20-880 Definitions. As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Operator. The term operator means any person who owns, operates or controls a place of entertainment or who promotes or produces an event to be held at a place of entertainment. Place of entertainment. The term place of entertainment means any privately or publicly owned and operated entertainment facility located in New York city, including, but not limited to, a theater, stadium, arena, racetrack, museum, amusement park or other place where performances, concerts, athletic games or contests are held and for which an entry fee is charged. Ticket. The term ticket means any evidence of the right of entry to any place of entertainment. Total ticket cost. The term total ticket cost means the cost of a ticket inclusive of all fees and taxes that must be paid in order to purchase the ticket. § 20-881 Total ticket cost disclosure. a. Every advertisement purchased, produced, or posted by (i) an operator of a place of entertainment, (ii) such an operator's agent, licensee or other third-party ticket seller, or (iii) a platform that facilitates the sale or resale of tickets, and which includes in such advertisement a ticket cost or a range of ticket costs, shall disclose in such advertisement in a clear and conspicuous manner the total ticket cost, or range of total ticket costs, as applicable. b. An operator of a place of entertainment may rely on the information provided to such operator by such operator's agent, licensee, third-party ticket seller, or platform that facilitates the sale or resale of tickets regarding the total ticket cost or the range of total ticket costs where such information is otherwise unavailable. In a proceeding to collect a civil penalty pursuant to section 20-882 of this subchapter, it shall be a complete defense for a respondent operator to establish that such operator relied on the information provided by such operator's agent, licensee, third-party ticket seller, or platform that facilitates the sale or resale of tickets regarding the total ticket cost or the range of total ticket costs. A copy of a communication between the respondent operator and such operator's agent, licensee, third-party ticket seller, or platform that facilitates the sale or resale of tickets regarding the total ticket cost or the range of total ticket costs shall constitute prima facie evidence that such respondent relied on such information. c. An operator's agent, licensee, third-party ticket seller, or platform that facilitates the sale or resale of tickets may rely on information provided to it by an operator regarding the total ticket cost or the range of total ticket costs where such information is otherwise unavailable. In a proceeding to collect a civil penalty pursuant to section 20-882 of this subchapter, it shall be a complete defense for a respondent agent, licensee, third-party ticket seller, or platform that facilitates the sale or resale of tickets to establish that such respondent relied on the information provided by an operator regarding the total ticket cost or the range of total ticket costs. A copy of a communication between the respondent agent, licensee, third-party ticket seller, or platform that facilitates the sale or resale of tickets and an operator regarding the total ticket cost or the range of total ticket costs shall constitute prima facie evidence that such respondent relied on such information. § 20-882 Penalties. a. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated thereunder is liable for a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation, not more than $250 for a second violation, and not more than $500 for a third or subsequent violation. b. Each distinct advertisement that violates any provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated thereunder shall constitute a separate violation. c. For the purposes of determining the total civil penalty, each day on which a violating advertisement is exposed to the public shall constitute a separate violation. Chapter 6: No-Fault Insurance Medical Clinics § 20-900 Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. Clinic shall mean any private, non-residential medical facility or practice, other than a hospital as defined in article 28 of the public health law, which provides health care services in the city of New York relating to injuries sustained as a result of motor vehicle accidents. 2. Control, including the terms controlling, controlled by and under common control by or with, shall mean the possession, direct or indirect, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of an institution, whether through ownership of voting securities, by contract or otherwise. 3. Health care provider shall mean any physician or other health care professional, including, but not limited to, dentists, nurses, x-ray technicians, physical or occupational therapists, massage therapists, acupuncturists, chiropractors and mental health service professionals, licensed to practice in New York state. 4. Health care services shall mean any health or mental health services provided by a health care provider relating to injuries sustained as a result of an actual or alleged motor vehicle accident, including but not limited to medical, hospital, surgical, nursing, dental, ambulance, x-ray, diagnostic, prescription drug, prosthetic, psychiatric, massage, acupuncture, chiropractic, and physical or occupational therapy and rehabilitation services. 5. Insured shall mean any person who owns a policy of insurance issued by a no-fault motor vehicle insurer that insures against losses or liabilities arising out of the ownership, operation, or use of a motor vehicle. 6. Medical benefits shall mean full or partial payments for health care services. 7. Motor vehicle shall mean any vehicle operated upon a public highway or public street propelled by any power other than muscular power. 8. No-fault insurance medical clinic shall mean any clinic that is subject to the requirements of this chapter. 9. No-fault motor vehicle insurance medical claim shall mean any claim for medical benefits submitted to a no-fault motor vehicle insurer under a policy issued by such no-fault motor vehicle insurer pursuant to article 51 of the New York state insurance law, which provides first party benefits as that term is defined in section 5102 (b) of such article. 10. No-fault motor vehicle insurer shall mean any insurer, company, corporation, partnership or other individual or entity authorized to transact or transacting business in New York state, or controlling or controlled by or under common control by or with such insurer, company, corporation, partnership or other individual or entity, which sells policies of insurance that insure against losses or liabilities arising out of the ownership, operation, or use of a motor vehicle. 11. Owner shall mean any owner, manager, operator or other person or persons having control of a clinic and any authorized agent thereof. 12. Runner shall mean any person who, for a pecuniary benefit, procures or attempts to procure a client, patient or customer when such person knows, or a reasonable person would know, that the purpose of an owner of a no-fault motor vehicle insurance medical clinic is to falsely or fraudulently: (i) obtain medical benefits from a no-fault motor vehicle insurer; or (ii) assert a claim against an insured or a no-fault motor vehicle insurer for the provision of health care services to such client, patient or customer; provided, however, that such term shall not include a person who procures or attempts to procure clients, patients or customers through public media or a person who refers clients, patients or customers as authorized by law. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit an agent, broker or employee of a health maintenance organization from seeking to sell health maintenance organization coverage or health insurance coverage to any individual or group. § 20-901 Reports. a. Where fifty percent or more of the billings for medical benefits filed by any clinic within the preceding twelve months were no-fault motor vehicle insurance medical claims, the owner of such clinic shall submit a report to the department pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision. b. Where fifty percent or more of the billings for medical benefits filed by all clinics owned by the same owner within the preceding twelve months were no-fault motor vehicle insurance medical claims, the owner of such clinics shall submit a report to the department pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision. c. Beginning December 1, 2006, any report to the department required by this section shall include: (i) the name, physical address and telephone number of each clinic under the control of such clinic's owner; (ii) the name, address and telephone number of all owners of each clinic; (iii) the name, address and telephone number of any management company hired by each clinic, if applicable; and (iv) the percentage of total medical bills filed within the preceding twelve months that were no-fault motor vehicle insurance medical claims, disaggregated by clinic, where applicable. Any owner of a no-fault insurance medical clinic shall attach to such report a sworn statement stating that: (1) within the preceding twelve months, no-fault motor vehicle insurance claims comprised fifty percent or more of the total billings of an individual clinic or all clinics owned by such owner; provided, however, that the department shall not require disclosure of the actual amount of no-fault insurance medical claims billed by any such clinic; and (2) such clinic does not use, solicit, direct, hire or employ any runners. § 20-902 Prohibited acts. a. No owner of a no-fault insurance medical clinic shall use, solicit, direct, hire or employ any runner. b. No person shall act as a runner. § 20-903 Rules. The commissioner shall promulgate any rules as may be necessary for the purposes of implementing and enforcing this chapter. § 20-904 Violations and penalties. a. Any person who violates section 20-901 of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than one thousand dollars nor more than ten thousand dollars for each violation; provided, however, that the commissioner shall issue a written warning in lieu of a civil penalty where the commissioner finds that such person violated such section due to his or her reasonable belief that the percentage of billings for no-fault motor vehicle insurance medical claims filed by his or her clinic or clinics was not at or above fifty percent during the preceding twelve months. b. Any person who violates paragraph a of section 20-902 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than ten thousand dollars for each runner used, solicited, directed, hired or employed, or a term of imprisonment not to exceed one year, or both. c. Any person who violates paragraph b of section 20-902 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than ten thousand dollars for each violation, or a term of imprisonment not to exceed one year, or both. d. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the imposition of any other penalty that may be imposed pursuant to any other law, rule or regulation. § 20-905 Enforcement. The department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to section 20-904 of this chapter shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged. The administrative tribunal shall have the power to render decisions and to impose the remedies and penalties provided for in section 20-904 of this chapter, in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. Chapter 7: Energy § 20-910 Air conditioning prohibitions. a. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: Chain of stores. The term chain of stores means five or more stores located within the city of New York that are engaged in the same general field of business and conduct business under the same business name or operate under common ownership or management or pursuant to a franchise agreement with the same franchisor. Commercial building or structure. The term commercial building or structure means a building or structure, or a portion thereof, classified in accordance with section BC 302 of the New York city building code in occupancy group B or M. Door. The term door means any door used to close off any exterior entrance to a commercial building or structure and that when open allows for the co-mingling of indoor and outdoor air, but shall not include doors that (i) adjoin indoor seating areas where food or beverages are served and link such areas to the outside or (ii) allow for direct service of food or beverages to outdoor space during times when servers are actively engaged in serving such space. Person. The term person means (i) with respect to the portion of a commercial building or structure that is a retail or wholesale establishment that sells goods or provides services to consumers, the owner or lessee of such establishment; and (ii) with respect to any other portion of a commercial building or structure, the record owner or lessee of such building or structure. Window. The term window means any window used to close off any exterior opening to a commercial building or structure and that when open allows for the co-mingling of indoor and outdoor air, but shall not include windows (i) in restaurants that adjoin indoor seating areas where food or beverages are served and link such areas to the outside or (ii) that allow for direct service of food or beverages to outdoor space during times when servers are actively engaged in serving such space. b. Except as provided in subdivision c of this section, it shall be unlawful to keep open any exterior door or window of a commercial building or structure while an air conditioner or central cooling system is operating that cools the area adjacent to such door or window, except as needed to permit the ingress and egress of people and the delivery and shipping of goods. c. The provisions of this section shall not apply when an emergency situation exists that requires an exterior door or window to be kept open. d. The department shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of subdivision b of this section. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty prescribed by subdivision e of this section shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation, which shall be returnable to the environmental control board or to any tribunal authorized to adjudicate notices of violation issued by the department. The environmental control board or such tribunal shall have the power to impose any civil penalty prescribed by subdivision e of this section. e. Any person who violates this section shall be liable for a civil penalty in the amount of zero dollars for each open door or window for the first violation and not more than five hundred dollars for each open door or window for any second and subsequent violation within an eighteen month period, except that such person shall be liable for a civil penalty in the amount of not more than five hundred dollars for each open door or window for the first violation and not more than one thousand dollars for each open door or window for any second and subsequent violation within an eighteen month period if the violation occurs at a store that is part of a chain of stores. f. Every store that is part of a chain of stores shall conspicuously post on each door a notice that states that violations of this section may be reported to 311. Such notice must be in the form and must contain the content as provided by the commissioner on the department's website. Notwithstanding subdivision e of this section, any person who violates this subdivision or any rule promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars, except that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for the first violation of this subdivision or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of this subdivision or any rule promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department’s administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. Chapter 8: Earned Safe and Sick Time Act. § 20-911 Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Earned Safe and Sick Time Act. § 20-912 Definitions. When used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 1. Calendar year shall mean a regular and consecutive twelve month period, as determined by an employer. 2. Chain business shall mean any employer that is part of a group of establishments that share a common owner or principal who owns at least thirty percent of each establishment where such establishments (i) engage in the same business or (ii) operate pursuant to franchise agreements with the same franchisor as defined in general business law section 681; provided that the total number of employees of all such establishments in such group is at least five. 3. Child shall mean a biological, adopted or foster child, a legal ward, or a child of an employee standing in loco parentis. 4. Commissioner shall mean the commissioner of consumer and worker protection. Department shall mean the department of consumer and worker protection. Domestic partner shall mean any person who has a registered domestic partnership pursuant to section 3-240 of the code, a domestic partnership registered in accordance with executive order number 123, dated August 7, 1989, or a domestic partnership registered in accordance with executive order number 48, dated January 7, 1993. 5. Domestic worker shall mean any person who provides care for a child, companionship for a sick, convalescing or elderly person, housekeeping, or any other domestic service in a home or residence. 6. Employee shall mean any employee as defined in subdivision 2 of section 190 of the labor law who is employed for hire within the city of New York who performs work on a full-time or part-time basis, including work performed in a transitional jobs program pursuant to section 336-f of the social services law, but not including work performed as a participant in a work experience program pursuant to section 336-c of the social services law, and not including those who are employed by (i) the United States government; (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state including the legislature and the judiciary; or (iii) the city of New York or any local government, municipality or county or any entity governed by section 92 of the general municipal law or section 207 of the county law. 7. Employer shall mean any employer as defined in subdivision (3) of section 190 of the labor law, but not including (i) the United States government; (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state including the legislature and the judiciary; or (iii) the city of New York or any local government, municipality or county or any entity governed by general municipal law section 92 or county law section 207. In determining the number of employees performing work for an employer for compensation during a given week, all employees performing work for compensation on a full-time, part-time or temporary basis shall be counted, provided that where the number of employees who work for an employer for compensation per week fluctuates, business size may be determined for the current calendar year based upon the average number of employees who worked for compensation per week during the preceding calendar year, and provided further that in determining the number of employees performing work for an employer that is a chain business, the total number of employees in that group of establishments shall be counted. 8. Family member shall mean an employee's child, spouse, domestic partner, parent, sibling, grandchild or grandparent; the child or parent of an employee's spouse or domestic partner; any other individual related by blood to the employee; and any other individual whose close association with the employee is the equivalent of a family relationship. 9. Family offense matter shall mean an act or threat of an act that may constitute disorderly conduct, harassment in the first degree, harassment in the second degree, aggravated harassment in the second degree, sexual misconduct, forcible touching, sexual abuse in the third degree, sexual abuse in the second degree as set forth in subdivision 1 of section 130.60 of the penal law, stalking in the first degree, stalking in the second degree, stalking in the third degree, stalking in the fourth degree, criminal mischief, menacing in the second degree, menacing in the third degree, reckless endangerment, strangulation in the first degree, strangulation in the second degree, criminal obstruction of breathing or blood circulation, assault in the second degree, assault in the third degree, an attempted assault, identity theft in the first degree, identity theft in the second degree, identity theft in the third degree, grand larceny in the fourth degree, grand larceny in the third degree or coercion in the second degree as set forth in subdivisions 1, 2 and 3 of section 135.60 of the penal law between spouses or former spouses, or between parent and child or between members of the same family or household. 10. Grandchild shall mean a child of an employee's child. Grandparent shall mean a parent of an employee's parent. Health care provider shall mean any person licensed under federal or New York state law to provide medical or emergency services, including, but not limited to, doctors, nurses and emergency room personnel. 11. Hourly professional employee shall mean any individual (i) who is professionally licensed by the New York state education department, office of professions, under the direction of the New York state board of regents under education law sections 6732, 7902 or 8202, (ii) who calls in for work assignments at will determining his or her own work schedule with the ability to reject or accept any assignment referred to them and (iii) who is paid an average hourly wage which is at least four times the federal minimum wage for hours worked during the calendar year. 12.Human trafficking shall mean an act or threat of an act that may constitute sex trafficking, as defined in section 230.34 of the penal law, or labor trafficking, as defined in section 135.35 and 135.36 of the penal law. 12. Member of the same family or household shall mean (i) persons related by consanguinity or affinity; (ii) persons legally married to or in a domestic partnership with one another; (iii) persons formerly married to or in a domestic partnership with one another regardless of whether they still reside in the same household; (iv) persons who have a child in common, regardless of whether such persons have been married or domestic partners or have lived together at any time; and (v) persons who are not related by consanguinity or affinity and who are or have been in an intimate relationship regardless of whether such persons have lived together at any time. 13. Parent shall mean a biological, foster, step- or adoptive parent, or a legal guardian of an employee to another person or a person who stood in loco parentis when the employee was a minor child. 14. Public disaster shall mean an event such as fire, explosion, terrorist attack, severe weather conditions or other catastrophe that is declared a public emergency or disaster by the president of the United States, the governor of the state of New York or the mayor of the city of New York. 15. Public health emergency shall mean a declaration made by the commissioner of health and mental hygiene pursuant to subdivision d of section 3.01 of the New York city health code or by the mayor pursuant to section 24 of the executive law. 16. Public service commission shall mean the public service commission established by section 4 of the public service law. 17. Safe time shall mean time that is provided by an employer to an employee that can be used for the purposes described in subdivision b of section 20-914 of this chapter, whether or not compensation for that time is required pursuant to this chapter. 18. Safe/sick time shall mean time that is provided by an employer to an employee that can be used for the purposes described in section 20-914 of this chapter, whether or not compensation for that time is required pursuant to this chapter. 19. Sexual offense shall mean an act or threat of an act that may constitute a violation of article 130 of the penal law. 20. Sibling shall mean an employee's brother or sister, including half-siblings, step-siblings and siblings related through adoption. 21. Sick time shall mean time that is provided by an employer to an employee that can be used for the purposes described in subdivision a of section 20-914 of this chapter, whether or not compensation for that time is required pursuant to this chapter. 22. Spouse shall mean a person to whom an employee is legally married under the laws of the state of New York. 23. Stalking shall mean an act or threat of an act that may constitute a violation of section 120.45, 120.50, 120.55, or 120.60 of the penal law. § 20-913 Right to safe/sick time; accrual. a. All employees have the right to safe/sick time pursuant to this chapter. 1. All employers that employ five or more employees, all employers of one or more domestic workers, and any employer of four or fewer employees that had a net income of one million dollars or more during the previous tax year, shall provide paid safe/sick time to their employees in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. An employer shall pay an employee for paid safe/ sick time at the employee's regular rate of pay at the time the paid safe/sick time is taken, provided that the rate of pay shall not be less than the highest applicable rate of pay to which the employee would be entitled pursuant to subdivision 1 of section 652 of the labor law, or any other applicable federal, state, or local law, rule, contract, or agreement. Such rate of pay shall be calculated without allowing for any tip credit or tip allowance set forth in any federal, state, or local law, rule, contract, or agreement. 2. All employees not entitled to paid safe/sick time pursuant to this chapter shall be entitled to unpaid safe/sick time in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. b. All employers shall provide a minimum of one hour of safe/sick time for every thirty hours worked by an employee, provided that employers with ninety- nine or fewer employees shall not be required under this chapter to provide more than a total of forty hours of safe/sick time for an employee in a calendar year and further provided that employers with one hundred or more employees shall not be required under this chapter to provide more than a total of fifty-six hours of safe/sick time for an employee in a calendar year. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to discourage or prohibit an employer from allowing the accrual of safe/sick time at a faster rate or the use of safe/sick time at an earlier date than this chapter requires. c. An employer required to provide paid safe/sick time pursuant to this chapter who provides an employee with an amount of paid leave, including paid time off, paid vacation, paid personal days or paid days of rest required to be compensated pursuant to subdivision 1 of section 161 of the labor law, sufficient to meet the requirements of this section and who allows such paid leave to be used for the same purposes and under the same conditions as safe/ sick time required pursuant to this chapter, is not required to provide additional paid safe/sick time for such employee whether or not such employee chooses to use such leave for the purposes included in section 20-914 of this chapter. An employer required to provide unpaid safe/sick time pursuant to this chapter who provides an employee with an amount of unpaid or paid leave, including unpaid or paid time off, unpaid or paid vacation, or unpaid or paid personal days, sufficient to meet the requirements of this section and who allows such leave to be used for the same purposes and under the same conditions as safe/sick time required pursuant to this chapter, is not required to provide additional unpaid safe/sick time for such employee whether or not such employee chooses to use such leave for the purposes set forth in section 20-914 of this chapter. d. Safe/sick time as provided pursuant to this chapter shall begin to accrue at the commencement of employment or on the effective date of the local law that created the right to such time, whichever is later. An employee shall be entitled to use safe/sick time as it is accrued, except that employees of any employer of four or fewer employees that had a net income of one million dollars or more during the previous tax year may use paid safe/sick time as it is accrued on or after January 1, 2021, and that employees of any employer of one hundred or more employees may use any accrued amount of paid safe/sick time that exceeds forty hours per calendar year on or after January 1, 2021. e. Employees who are exempt from the overtime requirements of New York state law or regulations, including the wage orders promulgated by the New York commissioner of labor pursuant to article 19 or 19-A of the labor law, shall be assumed to work forty hours in each work week for purposes of safe/sick time accrual unless their regular work week is less than forty hours, in which case safe/sick time accrues based upon that regular work week. f. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to (i) work study programs under 42 U.S.C. section 2753, (ii) employees for the hours worked and compensated by or through qualified scholarships as defined in 26 U.S.C. section 117, (iii) independent contractors who do not meet the definition of employee under subdivision 2 of section 190 of the labor law, and (iv) hourly professional employees. g. Employees shall determine how much accrued safe/sick time they need to use, provided that employers may set a reasonable minimum increment for the use of safe/sick time which shall not exceed four hours per day. h. For employees of employers with ninety-nine or fewer employees, up to forty hours of unused safe/sick time as provided pursuant to this chapter shall be carried over to the following calendar year, and for employees of employers with one hundred or more employees, up to fifty-six hours of unused safe/sick time as provided pursuant to this chapter shall be carried over to the following calendar year; provided that no employer with ninety-nine or fewer employees shall be required to (i) allow the use of more than forty hours of safe/sick time in a calendar year or (ii) carry over unused paid safe/sick time if the employee is paid for any unused safe/sick time at the end of the calendar year in which such time is accrued and the employer provides the employee with an amount of paid safe/sick time that meets or exceeds the requirements of this chapter for such employee for the immediately subsequent calendar year on the first day of such year; and further provided that no employer with one hundred or more employees shall be required to (i) allow the use of more than fifty-six hours of safe/sick time in a calendar year or (ii) carry over unused paid safe/sick time if the employee is paid for any unused safe/sick time at the end of the calendar year in which such time is accrued and the employer provides the employee with an amount of paid safe/sick time that meets or exceeds the requirements of this chapter for such employee for the immediately subsequent calendar year on the first day of such year. i. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring financial or other reimbursement to an employee from an employer upon the employee's termination, resignation, retirement, or other separation from employment for accrued safe/sick time that has not been used. j. If an employee is transferred to a separate division, entity or location in the city of New York, but remains employed by the same employer, such employee is entitled to all safe/sick time accrued at the prior division, entity or location and is entitled to retain or use all safe/sick time as provided pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. When there is a separation from employment and the employee is rehired within six months of separation by the same employer, previously accrued safe/sick time that was not used shall be reinstated and such employee shall be entitled to use such accrued safe/sick time at any time after such employee is rehired, provided that no employer shall be required to reinstate such safe/sick time to the extent the employee was paid for unused accrued safe/sick time prior to separation and the employee agreed to accept such pay for such unused safe/sick time. § 20-914 Use of safe/sick time. a. Sick time. 1. An employee shall be entitled to use sick time for absence from work due to: (a) such employee's mental or physical illness, injury or health condition or need for medical diagnosis, care or treatment of a mental or physical illness, injury or health condition or need for preventive medical care; or (b) care of a family member who needs medical diagnosis, care or treatment of a mental or physical illness, injury or health condition or who needs preventive medical care; or (c) closure of such employee's place of business by order of a public official due to a public health emergency or such employee's need to care for a child whose school or childcare provider has been closed by order of a public official due to a public health emergency. 2. For an absence of more than three consecutive work days for sick time, an employer may require reasonable documentation that the use of sick time was authorized by this subdivision. For sick time used pursuant to this subdivision, documentation signed by a licensed health care provider indicating the need for the amount of sick time taken shall be considered reasonable documentation and an employer shall not require that such documentation specify the nature of the employee's or the employee's family member's injury, illness or condition, except as required by law. Where a health care provider charges an employee a fee for the provision of documentation requested by their employer, such employer shall reimburse the employee for such fee. b. Safe time. 1. An employee shall be entitled to use safe time for absence from work due to any of the following reasons when the employee or employee's family member has been the victim of domestic violence pursuant to subdivision thirty- four of section two hundred ninety-two of the executive law, a family offense matter, sexual offense, stalking, or human trafficking: (a) to obtain services from a domestic violence shelter, rape crisis center, or other shelter or services program for relief from a family offense matter, sexual offense, stalking, or human trafficking; (b) to participate in safety planning, temporarily or permanently relocate, or take other actions to increase the safety of the employee or employee's family members from future family offense matters, sexual offenses, stalking, or human trafficking; (c) to meet with a civil attorney or other social service provider to obtain information and advice on, and prepare for or participate in any criminal or civil proceeding, including but not limited to, matters related to a family offense matter, sexual offense, stalking, human trafficking, custody, visitation, matrimonial issues, orders of protection, immigration, housing, discrimination in employment, housing or consumer credit; (d) to file a complaint or domestic incident report with law enforcement; (e) to meet with a district attorney's office; (f) to enroll children in a new school; or (g) to take other actions necessary to maintain, improve, or restore the physical, psychological, or economic health or safety of the employee or the employee's family member or to protect those who associate or work with the employee. 2. For an absence of more than three consecutive work days for safe time, an employer may require reasonable documentation that the use of safe time was authorized by this subdivision. For safe time used pursuant to this subdivision, documentation signed by an employee, agent, or volunteer of a victim services organization, an attorney, a member of the clergy, or a medical or other professional service provider from whom the employee or that employee's family member has sought assistance in addressing domestic violence, family offense matters, sex offenses, stalking, or human trafficking and their effects; a police or court record; or a notarized letter from the employee explaining the need for such time shall be considered reasonable documentation and an employer shall not require that such documentation specify the details of the domestic violence, family offense matter, sexual offense, stalking, or human trafficking. An employer shall reimburse an employee for all reasonable costs or expenses incurred for the purpose of obtaining such documentation for an employer. c. An employer may require reasonable notice of the need to use safe/sick time. Where such need is foreseeable, an employer may require reasonable advance notice of the intention to use such safe/sick time, not to exceed seven days prior to the date such safe/sick time is to begin. Where such need is not foreseeable, an employer may require an employee to provide notice of the need for the use of safe/sick time as soon as practicable. d. Nothing herein shall prevent an employer from requiring an employee to provide written confirmation that an employee used safe/sick time pursuant to this section. e. An employer shall not require an employee, as a condition of taking safe/sick time, to search for or find a replacement worker to cover the hours during which such employee is utilizing time. f. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit an employer from taking disciplinary action, up to and including termination, against a worker who uses safe/sick time provided pursuant to this chapter for purposes other than those described in this section. §20-914.1 COVID-19 child vaccination time. Repealed. § 20-915 Changing schedule. Upon mutual consent of the employee and the employer, an employee who is absent for a reason listed in subdivision a of section 20-914 of this chapter may work additional hours during the immediately preceding seven days if the absence was foreseeable or within the immediately subsequent seven days from that absence without using safe/sick time to make up for the original hours for which such employee was absent, provided that an adjunct professor who is an employee at an institute of higher education may work such additional hours at any time during the academic term. An employer shall not require such employee to work additional hours to make up for the original hours for which such employee was absent or to search for or find a replacement employee to cover the hours during which the employee is absent pursuant to this section. If such employee works additional hours, and such hours are fewer than the number of hours such employee was originally scheduled to work, then such employee shall be able to use safe/sick time provided pursuant to this chapter for the difference. Should the employee work additional hours, the employer shall comply with any applicable federal, state or local labor laws. § 20-916 Collective bargaining agreements. a. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any employee covered by a valid collective bargaining agreement if (i) such provisions are expressly waived in such collective bargaining agreement and (ii) such agreement provides for a comparable benefit for the employees covered by such agreement in the form of paid days off; such paid days off shall be in the form of leave, compensation, other employee benefits, or some combination thereof. Comparable benefits shall include, but are not limited to, vacation time, personal time, safe/sick time, and holiday and Sunday time pay at premium rates. b. Notwithstanding subdivision a of this section, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any employee in the construction or grocery industry covered by a valid collective bargaining agreement if such provisions are expressly waived in such collective bargaining agreement. § 20-917 In the event of a public disaster, the mayor may, for the length of such disaster, suspend the provisions of this chapter for businesses, corporations or other entities regulated by the public service commission. § 20-918 Retaliation and interference prohibited. a. No person shall interfere with any investigation, proceeding or hearing pursuant to this chapter. b. No person shall take any adverse action against an employee that penalizes an employee for, or is reasonably likely to deter an employee from, exercising or attempting to exercise rights under this chapter or interfere with an employee's exercise of rights under this chapter and implementing rules. c. Adverse actions include, but are not limited to, threats, intimidation, discipline, discharge, demotion, suspension, harassment, discrimination, reduction in hours or pay, informing another employer of an employee's exercise of rights under this chapter, blacklisting, and maintenance or application of an absence control policy that counts protected leave for safe/sick time as an absence that may lead to or result in an adverse action. Adverse actions include actions related to perceived immigration status or work authorization. d. An employee need not explicitly refer to a provision of this chapter or implementing rules to be protected from an adverse action. e. The protections of this section shall apply to any person who mistakenly but in good faith asserts their rights or alleges a violation of this chapter. f. A causal connection between the exercise, attempted exercise, or anticipated exercise of rights protected by this chapter and implementing rules and an employer's adverse action against an employee or a group of employees may be established by indirect or direct evidence. g. For purposes of subdivision b of this section, a violation is established when it is shown that a protected activity was a motivating factor for an adverse action, whether or not other factors motivated the adverse action. §20-919 notice of rights. a. 1. An employer shall provide an employee with written notice of such employee's right to safe/sick time pursuant to this chapter, including the accrual and use of safe/sick time, the calendar year of the employer, and the right to be free from retaliation and to file a complaint with the department. Such notice shall be in English and the primary language spoken by that employee, provided that the department has made available a translation of such notice in such language pursuant to subdivision b of this section. Such notice shall also be conspicuously posted at an employer's place of business in an area accessible to employees. 2. Such notice shall be provided to each employee at the commencement of employment. For employees who were already employed prior to the effective dates of provisions of this chapter establishing their right to safe/sick time, such notice shall be provided within thirty days of the effective date of the local law that established each such right. b. The department shall create and make available notices that contain the information required pursuant to subdivision a of this section concerning safe/ sick time and such notices shall allow for the employer to fill in applicable dates for such employer's calendar year. Such notices shall be posted in a downloadable format on the department's website in Chinese, English, French- Creole, Italian, Korean, Russian, Spanish and any other language deemed appropriate by the department. c. The amount of safe/sick time accrued and used during a pay period and an employee's total balance of accrued safe/sick time shall be noted on a pay statement or other form of written documentation provided to the employee each pay period. d. Any person or entity that willfully violates the notice requirements of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed fifty dollars for each employee who was not given appropriate notice pursuant to this section. §20.919.1 Public education campaign. a. The commissioner shall engage in ongoing public education efforts to inform employers, employment agencies, employees and job applicants about their rights and responsibilities under this chapter, and shall make best efforts to: 1. In coordination with the department of health and mental hygiene, distribute posters, flyers, and other written materials concerning employees’ rights pursuant to this chapter to pharmacies, doctors’ offices, and hospitals and such other sites as may be appropriate; and 2. Invite the New York city health and hospitals corporation to participate in the posting and dissemination of posters, flyers and written materials concerning employees’ rights pursuant to this chapter. b. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the acceptance or display of such materials by private entities. § 20-920 Employer records. Employers shall make and retain records documenting such employer's compliance with the requirements of this chapter for a period of three years unless otherwise required pursuant to any other law, rule or regulation, and shall allow the department to access such records, with appropriate notice and at a mutually agreeable time of day, in furtherance of an investigation conducted pursuant to this chapter. a. An employer may not require the disclosure of details relating to an employee's or his or her family member's medical condition or require the disclosure of details relating to an employee's or his or her family member's status as a victim of domestic violence, family offenses, sexual offenses, stalking, or human trafficking as a condition of providing safe/sick time under this chapter. Health information about an employee or an employee's family member, and information concerning an employee's or his or her family member's status or perceived status as a victim of domestic violence, family offenses, sexual offenses, stalking or human trafficking obtained solely for the purposes of utilizing safe/sick time pursuant to this chapter, shall be treated as confidential and shall not be disclosed except by the affected employee, with the written permission of the affected employee or as required by law. Provided, however, that nothing in this section shall preclude an employer from considering information provided in connection with a request for safe time in connection with a request for reasonable accommodation pursuant to subdivision 27 of section 8-107. § 20-922 Encouragement of more generous policies; no effect on more generous policies. a. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to discourage or prohibit the adoption or retention of a safe time or sick time policy more generous than that which is required herein. b. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as diminishing the obligation of an employer to comply with any contract, collective bargaining agreement, employment benefit plan or other agreement providing more generous safe time or sick time to an employee than required herein. c. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as diminishing the rights of public employees regarding safe time or sick time as provided pursuant to federal, state or city law. §20-923 Other legal requirements. a. This chapter provides minimum requirements pertaining to safe time and sick time and shall not be construed to preempt, limit or otherwise affect the applicability of any other law, regulation, rule, requirement, policy or standard that provides for greater accrual or use by employees of safe time or sick time, whether paid or unpaid, or that extends other protections to employees. b. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as creating or imposing any requirement in conflict with any federal or state law, rule or regulation, nor shall anything in this chapter be construed to diminish or impair the rights of an employee or employer under any valid collective bargaining agreement. c. Where section 196-b of the labor law, or any regulation issued thereunder, sets forth a standard or requirement for minimum hour or use of safe/sick time that exceeds any provision in this chapter, such standard or requirement shall be incorporated by reference and shall be enforceable by the department in the manner set forth in this chapter and subject to the penalties and remedies set forth in the labor law. a. The department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. In effectuating such enforcement, the department shall establish a system utilizing multiple means of communication to receive complaints regarding non- compliance with this chapter and investigate complaints received by the department in a timely manner. The department may open an investigation upon receipt of a complaint or on its own initiative. b. Any person alleging a violation of this chapter shall have the right to file a complaint with the department within 2 years of the date the person knew or should have known of the alleged violation. The department shall maintain confidential the identity of any natural person providing information relevant to enforcement of this chapter unless disclosure of such person's identity is necessary to the department for resolution of its investigation or otherwise required by federal or state law. The department shall, to the extent practicable, notify such person that the department will be disclosing such person’s identity prior to such disclosure. c. 1. Upon receiving a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, the department shall investigate such complaint, provided that if the complainant commences a civil action pursuant to subdivision f of this section for the same alleged violation, the department shall stay such investigation until the department is notified such civil action is withdrawn or dismissed without prejudice. Upon notice of a final judgment or settlement in such a civil action, the department shall dismiss the complaint unless the department determines the complaint alleges a violation not resolved by such judgment or settlement. The complainant must notify the department, in a manner prescribed by the commissioner and described on the department’s website, within 30 days of the date that the time for any appeal has lapsed that such complaint is withdrawn, dismissed without prejudice, or resolved by final judgment or settlement. Nothing in this paragraph shall affect the authority of the department to open an investigation on its own initiative pursuant to subdivision a of this section. 2. Within 14 days of written notification of an investigation by the department, the person or entity under investigation shall provide the department with a written response and such other information as the department may request. The department shall keep complainants reasonably notified regarding the status of their complaint and any resultant investigation. If, as a result of an investigation of a complaint or an investigation conducted upon its own initiative, the department believes that a violation has occurred, it shall issue to the offending person or entity a notice of violation. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of such notices of violation. The notice of violation shall be returnable to the administrative tribunal authorized to adjudicate violations of this chapter. d. The department shall have the power to impose penalties provided for in this chapter and to grant each and every employee or former employee all appropriate relief. Such relief shall include: (i) for each instance of safe/ sick time taken by an employee but unlawfully not compensated by the employer: 3 times the wages that should have been paid under this chapter or $250, whichever is greater; (ii) for each instance of safe/sick time requested by an employee but unlawfully denied by the employer and not taken by the employee or unlawfully conditioned upon searching for or finding a replacement worker, or for each instance an employer requires an employee to work additional hours without the mutual consent of such employer and employee in violation of section 20-915 of this chapter to make up for the original hours during which such employee is absent pursuant to this chapter: $500; (iii) for each violation of section 20-918 not including discharge from employment: full compensation including wages and benefits lost, $500 and equitable relief as appropriate; (iv) for each instance of unlawful discharge from employment: full compensation including wages and benefits lost, $2,500 and equitable relief, including reinstatement, as appropriate; and (v) for each employee covered by an employer's official or unofficial policy or practice of not providing or refusing to allow the use of accrued safe/sick time in violation of section 20-913, $500. e. Any entity or person found to be in violation of the provisions of sections 20-913, 20-914, 20-915 or 20-918 of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty payable to the city not to exceed $500 for the first violation and, for subsequent violations that occur within 2 years of any previous violation, not to exceed $750 for the second violation and not to exceed $1,000 for each succeeding violation. Penalties shall be imposed on a per employee and per instance basis. f. Any person alleging a violation of this chapter may commence a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to seek compensatory damages, including, but not limited to, the relief set forth in subdivision d of this section, injunctive and declaratory relief, attorney’s fees and costs, and such other relief as such court deems appropriate. Such civil action shall be commenced within 2 years of the date the person knew or should have known of the alleged violation. g. Filing a complaint with the department in accordance with subdivision b of this section shall be neither a prerequisite nor a bar to bringing a civil action pursuant to subdivision f of this section. h. The department shall annually report on its website: the number and nature of the complaints filed pursuant to this chapter, including the number of such complaints not substantiated and the number of notices of violations issued; the number of civil actions, to the extent the department is notified of such civil actions pursuant to this chapter; the number of investigations opened and closed pursuant to this chapter; and the average time for a complaint to be resolved pursuant to this chapter. §20-924.1 Enforcement by the corporation counsel. The corporation counsel or such other persons designated by the corporation counsel on behalf of the department may initiate in any court of competent jurisdiction any action or proceeding that may be appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of any order issued by the department pursuant to this chapter or for the correction of any violation issued pursuant to section 20-924, including actions to mandate compliance with the provisions of such order, secure permanent injunctions, enjoining any acts or practices that constitute such violation, mandating compliance with the provisions of this chapter or such other relief as may be appropriate. § 20-924.2 Civil action by corporation counsel for pattern or practice of violations. a. Cause of action. 1. Where reasonable cause exists to believe that an employer is engaged in a pattern or practice of violations of this chapter, the corporation counsel or such other persons designated by the corporation counsel may commence a civil action on behalf of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction. 2. The corporation counsel or such other persons designated by the corporation counsel shall commence such action by filing a complaint setting forth facts relating to such pattern or practice and requesting relief, which may include injunctive relief, civil penalties and any other appropriate relief. 3. Nothing in this section prohibits the department from exercising its authority under section 20-924 or the city charter, provided that a civil action pursuant to this section shall not have previously been commenced. b. Investigation. The corporation counsel may initiate any investigation to ascertain such facts as may be necessary for the commencement of a civil action pursuant to subdivision a of this section, and in connection therewith shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, to administer oaths and to examine such persons as are deemed necessary. c. Civil penalties and relief for employees. In any civil action commenced pursuant to subdivision a of this section, the trier of fact may impose a civil penalty of not more than $15,000 for a finding that an employer has engaged in a pattern or practice of violations of this chapter. Any civil penalty so recovered shall be paid into the general fund of the city. The trier of fact may, in addition, award relief of up to $500 to each employee covered by an employer's official or unofficial policy or practice of not providing or refusing to allow the use of earned time in violation of section 20-913. § 20-925 Designation of agency. Repealed. § 20-926 Election of qualified transportation benefits in lieu of taxable dollar compensation for certain non-governmental employees. a. Except as provided in subdivision c of this section, every employer with twenty or more full-time employees in the city of New York shall offer full-time employees the opportunity to use pre-tax earnings to purchase qualified transportation fringe benefits, other than qualified parking, in accordance with federal law, provided that in the event that such employer's number of full-time employees is reduced to less than twenty, any employee eligible to be provided such opportunity prior to the employee reduction shall continue to be provided such opportunity for the duration of such employee's employment with such employer. For purposes of this section, full-time employees shall mean employees who work an average of thirty hours or more per week for such employer for such period of time as the commissioner establishes by rule. b. The provisions of this section shall be enforceable by the department. Any notice of violation issued by the department shall be returnable to the administrative tribunal authorized to adjudicate violations of this chapter as set forth in the department's rules. The department shall prescribe the form and wording of such notices of violation. Any employer found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty payable to the city of New York of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than two hundred fifty dollars for the first violation. Such employer shall have ninety days to cure such first violation before a civil penalty shall be imposed. After the expiration of such cure period, every thirty-day period in which such employer fails to offer such benefit shall constitute a subsequent violation and a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars shall be imposed for each such subsequent violation. A civil penalty shall not be imposed on any individual employer more than once in any thirty-day period. c. Subdivision a of this section shall not apply (i) to the United States government, the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state including the legislature and the judiciary, or the city of New York or any local government, municipality or county or any entity governed by general municipal law section 92 or county law section 207; (ii) where a collective bargaining agreement exists between any group of employees and an employer, except where the number of full-time employees not covered by any such agreement is twenty or more, in which case those full-time employees not covered by any such agreement shall be eligible for such benefit; or (iii) where such employer is not required by law to pay federal, state and city payroll taxes. In addition, the department may waive the requirements of this section for an employer if such employer has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the department that the offering of such benefit would be a financial hardship for such employer. d. The commissioner may promulgate such rules as he or she deems necessary to effectuate the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, establishing civil penalties for the violation of such rules in amounts not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for any such violation. e. For the purposes of this chapter, department shall mean the department of consumer and worker protection and commissioner shall mean the commissioner of consumer and worker protection. Chapter 10: Freelance Workers § 20-927 Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Commissioner. The term commissioner means the commissioner of consumer and worker protection. Department. The term department means the department of consumer and worker protection. Freelance worker. The term freelance worker means any natural person or any organization composed of no more than one natural person, whether or not incorporated or employing a trade name, that is hired or retained as an independent contractor by a hiring party to provide services in exchange for compensation. This term does not include: 1. Any person who, pursuant to the contract at issue, is a sales representative as defined in section 191-a of the labor law; 2. Any person engaged in the practice of law pursuant to the contract at issue and who is a member in good standing of the bar of the highest court of any state, possession, territory, commonwealth or the District of Columbia and who is not under any order of any court suspending, enjoining, restraining, disbarring or otherwise restricting such person in the practice of law; and 3. Any person who is a licensed medical professional. Hiring party. The term hiring party means any person who retains a freelance worker to provide any service, other than (i) the United States government, (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, agency, authority or other body of the state including the legislature and the judiciary, (iii) the city, including any office, department, agency or other body of the city, (iv) any other local government, municipality or county or (v) any foreign government. § 20-928 Written Contract required. a. Whenever a hiring party retains the services of a freelance worker and the contract between them has a value of $800 or more, either by itself or when aggregated with all contracts for services between the same hiring party and freelance worker during the immediately preceding 120 days, the contract shall be reduced to writing. Each party to the written contract shall retain a copy thereof. b. The written contract shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 1. The name and mailing address of both the hiring party and the freelance worker; 2. An itemization of all services to be provided by the freelance worker, the value of the services to be provided pursuant to the contract and the rate and method of compensation; and 3. The date on which the hiring party must pay the contracted compensation or the mechanism by which such date will be determined. c. The commissioner may by rule require additional terms to ensure that the freelance worker and the hiring party understand their obligations under the contract. § 20-929 Unlawful Payment Practices. a. Except as otherwise provided by law, the contracted compensation shall be paid to the freelance worker either: 1. On or before the date such compensation is due under the terms of the contract; or 2. If the contract does not specify when the hiring party must pay the contracted compensation or the mechanism by which such date will be determined, no later than 30 days after the completion of the freelance worker's services under the contract. b. Once a freelance worker has commenced performance of the services under the contract, the hiring party shall not require as a condition of timely payment that the freelance worker accept less compensation than the amount of the contracted compensation. § 20-930 Retaliation. No hiring party shall threaten, intimidate, discipline, harass, deny a work opportunity to or discriminate against a freelance worker, or take any other action that penalizes a freelance worker for, or is reasonably likely to deter a freelancer worker from, exercising or attempting to exercise any right guaranteed under this chapter, or from obtaining future work opportunity because the freelance worker has done so. § 20-931 Complaint procedure; jurisdiction of commissioner. a. Complaint. A freelance worker who is aggrieved by a violation of this chapter may file a complaint with the commissioner within two years after the acts alleged to have violated this chapter occurred. The commissioner shall prescribe the form of the complaint, which shall include, at a minimum: 1. The name and mailing address of the freelance worker and of the hiring party alleged to have violated this chapter; 2. A statement detailing the terms of the freelance contract, including a copy of such contract if available; 3. The freelance worker's occupation; 4. A statement detailing the alleged violations of this chapter; and 5. A signed affirmation that all facts alleged in the complaint are true. b. Referral to navigation program. At the time the commissioner receives a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, the commissioner shall refer the freelance worker to the navigation program identified in section 20-932. c. Jurisdiction. 1. The commissioner does not have jurisdiction over a complaint if: (a) Either party to the contract has initiated a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction alleging a violation of this chapter or a breach of contract arising out of the contract that is the subject of the complaint filed under subdivision a of this section, unless such civil action has been dismissed without prejudice to future claims; or (b) Either party to the contract has filed a claim or complaint before any administrative agency under any local, state or federal law alleging a breach of contract that is the subject of the complaint filed under subdivision a of this section, unless the administrative claim or complaint has been withdrawn or dismissed without prejudice to future claims. 2. Where the commissioner lacks jurisdiction over a complaint, the commissioner shall notify the following, in writing, within 10 days of discovering the lack of jurisdiction: (a) The freelance worker; and (b) The hiring party, if the director discovered the lack of jurisdiction after sending a notice to the hiring party pursuant to subdivision d of this section. d. Notice to hiring party. Within 20 days of receiving a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, the commissioner shall send the hiring party named in the complaint a written notice of complaint. Such notice shall inform the hiring party that a complaint has been filed alleging violations of this chapter, detail the remedies available to a freelance worker for violations of this chapter by a hiring party and include a copy of the complaint and notice that failure to respond to the complaint creates a rebuttable presumption in any civil action commenced pursuant to this chapter that the hiring party committed the violations alleged in the complaint. The commissioner shall send such notice by certified mail and shall bear the cost of sending such notice. e. Response. 1. Within 20 days of receiving the notice of complaint, the hiring party identified in the complaint shall send the commissioner one of the following: (a) A written statement that the freelance worker has been paid in full and proof of such payment; or (b) A written statement that the freelance worker has not been paid in full and the reasons for the failure to provide such payment. 2. Within 20 days of receiving the written response, the commissioner shall send the freelance worker a copy of: (a) The response; (b) Any enclosures submitted to the commissioner with the response; (c) Materials informing the freelance worker that he or she may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction; (d) Any other information about the status of the complaint; and (e) Information about the navigation program described in section 20-932. 3. If the commissioner receives no response to the notice of complaint within the time provided by paragraph 1 of this subdivision, the commissioner shall mail a notice of non-response to both the freelance worker and the hiring party by regular mail and shall include with such notice proof that the commissioner previously mailed the notice of complaint to the hiring party by certified mail. Upon satisfying the requirements of this paragraph, the commissioner may close the case. § 20-932 Navigation Program. a. The commissioner shall establish a navigation program that provides information and assistance, as set forth in subdivision c of this section, relating to the provisions of this chapter. Such program shall include assistance by a natural person by phone and e-mail and shall also include online information. b. The commissioner shall make available model contracts on the website of the department for use by the general public at no cost. Such model contracts shall be made available in English and in the six languages most commonly spoken by limited English proficient individuals in the city as determined by the department of city planning. c. The navigation program shall provide the following: 1. General court information and information about procedures under this chapter; 2. Information about available templates and relevant court forms; 3. General information about classifying persons as employees or independent contractors; 4. Information about obtaining translation and interpretation services and other courtroom services; 5. A list of organizations that can be used for the identification of attorneys; and 6. Other information, as determined by the commissioner, related to the submission of a complaint by a freelance worker or the commencement of a civil action pursuant to this chapter by a freelance worker. d. The navigation program shall include outreach and education to the public on the provisions of this chapter. e. The navigation program shall not provide legal advice. § 20-933 Civil Action. a. Cause of action. 1. Except as otherwise provided by law, a freelance worker alleging a violation of this chapter may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction for damages as described in subdivision b of this section. 2. Any action alleging a violation of section 20-928 shall be brought within two years after the acts alleged to have violated this chapter occurred. 3. Any action alleging a violation of sections 20-929 or 20-930 shall be brought within six years after the acts alleged to have violated this chapter occurred. 4. Within 10 days after having commenced a civil action pursuant to subdivision a of this section, a plaintiff shall serve a copy of the complaint upon an authorized representative of the commissioner. Failure to so serve a complaint does not adversely affect any plaintiff's cause of action. 5. A plaintiff who solely alleges a violation of section 20-928 must prove that such plaintiff requested a written contract before the contracted work began. b. Damages. 1. A plaintiff who prevails on a claim alleging a violation of this chapter shall be awarded damages as described in this subdivision and an award of reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 2. Violation of section 20-928. (a) A plaintiff who prevails on a claim alleging a violation of section 20-928 shall be awarded statutory damages of $250. (b) A plaintiff who prevails on a claim alleging a violation of section 20-928 and on one or more claims under other provisions of this chapter shall be awarded statutory damages equal to the value of the underlying contract for the violation of section 20-928 in addition to the remedies specified in this chapter for the other violations. 3. Violation of section 20-929. In addition to any other damages awarded pursuant to this chapter, a plaintiff who prevails on a claim alleging a violation of section 20-929 is entitled to an award for double damages, injunctive relief and other such remedies as may be appropriate. 4. Violation of section 20-930. In addition to any other damages awarded pursuant to this chapter, a plaintiff who prevails on a claim alleging a violation of section 20-930 is entitled to statutory damages equal to the value of the underlying contract for each violation arising under such section. § 20-934 Civil action for pattern or practice of violations. a. Cause of action. 1. Where reasonable cause exists to believe that a hiring party is engaged in a pattern or practice of violations of this chapter, the corporation counsel may commence a civil action on behalf of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction. 2. An action pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall be commenced by filing a complaint setting forth facts relating to such pattern or practice and requesting relief, which may include injunctive relief, civil penalties and any other appropriate relief. 3. Nothing in this section prohibits: (a) A person alleging a violation of this chapter from filing a civil action pursuant to section 20-933 based on the same facts as a civil action commenced by the corporation counsel pursuant to this section. (b) The commissioner from sending a notice of complaint pursuant to section 20-931, unless otherwise barred from doing so. b. Civil penalty. In any civil action commenced pursuant to subdivision a of this section, the trier of fact may impose a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 for a finding that a hiring party has engaged in a pattern or practice of violations of this chapter. Any civil penalty so recovered shall be paid into the general fund of the city. § 20-935 Application; waiver; effect on other laws. a. Except as otherwise provided by law, any provision of a contract purporting to waive rights under this chapter is void as against public policy. b. The provisions of this chapter supplement, and do not diminish or replace, any other basis of liability or requirement established by statute or common law. c. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter does not render any contract between a hiring party and a freelance worker void or voidable or otherwise impair any obligation, claim or right related to such contract or constitute a defense to any action or proceeding to enforce, or for breach of, such contract. d. No provision of this chapter shall be construed as providing a determination about the legal classification of any individual as an employee or independent contractor. § 20-936 Follow-up; data collection; reporting. a. No later than six months after the commissioner sends to a freelance worker either a hiring party's response and accompanying materials or a notice of non-response pursuant to paragraph 2 or 3 of subdivision e of section 20-931, the commissioner shall send the freelance worker a survey requesting additional information about the resolution of the freelance worker's claims. Such survey shall ask whether or not the freelance worker pursued any such claims in court or through an alternative dispute resolution process and whether or not the hiring party ultimately paid any or all of the compensation the freelance worker alleged was due or if the matter was resolved in a different manner. Such survey shall state clearly that response to the survey is voluntary. b. The commissioner shall collect and track information about complaints alleging violations of this chapter. The information collected shall include, at minimum: 1. The identity of the hiring party alleged to have violated this chapter; 2. The freelance worker's occupation; 3. The section of this chapter that was alleged to have been violated; 4. The value of the contract; 5. The response or non-response from the hiring party; and 6. Information from a completed survey identified in subdivision a of this section. c. One year after the effective date of the local law that added this chapter, and every fifth year thereafter on November 1, the commissioner shall submit to the council and publish on its website a report regarding the effectiveness of this chapter at improving freelance contracting and payment practices. That report shall include, at a minimum: 1. The number of complaints the commissioner has received pursuant to this chapter; 2. The value of the contracts disaggregated into ranges of $500 and by section of this chapter alleged to have been violated; 3. The numbers of responses and non-responses received by the commissioner disaggregated by contract value into ranges of $500 and by section of this chapter alleged to have been violated; 4. The proportion of surveys received from freelance workers that indicate that they pursued their claims in court and the proportion of surveys received from freelance workers that indicate that they pursued their claims through an alternative dispute resolution process and a summary of the outcomes of such cases; and 5. Legislative recommendations for this chapter, including consideration of whether certain occupations should be exempted from the scope of the definition of freelance worker in section 20-927. Chapter 11: Information on Student Loan Forgiveness Programs § 20-1101 Information on student loan forgiveness for employees and applicants for employment. a. For purposes of this section, the term employer means any person or entity covered by the definition of employer set forth in subdivision 6 of section 651 of the labor law, except that such term does not include (i) the United States government; (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state including the legislature and the judiciary; or (iii) the city or any local government, municipality or county or any entity governed by section 92 of the general municipal law or section 207 of the county law. b. Provision of notice. 1. The department shall make available the notice prepared under section 12-211 to employers in the city, as appropriate, in order that such employers may provide the notice to employees and applicants for employment. 2. The department shall make such notice available on its website in a downloadable format. c. The department shall provide outreach and education about the availability of federal and state student loan forgiveness programs to employers in the city likely to be impacted by this section. Chapter 12: Fair Work Practices Subchapter 1: General Provisions § 20-1201 Definitions. As used in this chapter, except as otherwise specifically provided, the following terms have the following meanings: 1. Chain. The term chain means a set of establishments that share a common brand or that are characterized by standardized options for decor, marketing, packaging, products and services. 2. Commissioner. The term commissioner means the commissioner of consumer and worker protection. 3. Department. The term department means the department of consumer and worker protection. 4. Employee. The term employee means any person covered by the definition of employee set forth in subdivision 5 of section 651 of the labor law or by the definition of employee set forth in 29 U.S.C. § 203(e) and who is employed within the city and who performs work on a full-time or part-time basis, including work performed in a transitional jobs program pursuant to section 336-f of the social services law, but not including work performed as a participant in a work experience program pursuant to section 336-c of the social services law. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the term employee does not include any person who is employed by (i) the United States government; (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state, including the legislature and the judiciary; or (iii) the city or any local government, municipality or county or any entity governed by section 92 of the general municipal law or section 207 of the county law. 5. Employer. The term employer means any person or entity covered by the definition of employer set forth in subdivision 6 of section 651 of the labor law or any person or entity covered by the definition of employer set forth in in 29 U.S.C. § 203(d). Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the term employer does not include (i) the United States government; (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state including the legislature and the judiciary; or (iii) the city or any local government, municipality or county or any entity governed by section 92 of the general municipal law or section 207 of the county law. 6. Fast food employee. The term fast food employee means any person employed or permitted to work at or for a fast food establishment by any employer that is located within the city where such person's job duties include at least one of the following: customer service, cooking, food or drink preparation, delivery, security, stocking supplies or equipment, cleaning or routine maintenance. The term fast food employee does not include any employee who is salaried. 7. Fast food employer. The term fast food employer means any employer that employs a fast food employee at a fast food establishment. 8. Fast food establishment. The term fast food establishment means any establishment (i) that has as its primary purpose serving food or drink items; (ii) where patrons order or select items and pay before eating and such items may be consumed on the premises, taken out or delivered to the customer's location; (iii) that offers limited service; (iv) that is part of a chain; and (v) that is one of 30 or more establishments nationally, including (A) an integrated enterprise that owns or operates 30 or more such establishments in the aggregate nationally or (B) an establishment operated pursuant to a franchise where the franchisor and the franchisees of such franchisor own or operate 30 or more such establishments in the aggregate nationally. The term fast food establishment includes such establishments located within non-fast food establishments. 9. Franchise. The term franchise has the same definition as set forth in section 681 of the general business law. 10. Franchisee. The term franchisee means a person or entity to whom a franchise is granted. 11. Franchisor. The term franchisor means a person or entity who grants a franchise to another person or entity. 12. Integrated enterprise. The term integrated enterprise means two or more entities sufficiently integrated so as to be considered a single employer as determined by application of the following factors: (i) degree of interrelation between the operations of multiple entities; (ii) degree to which the entities share common management; (iii) centralized control of labor relations; and (iv) degree of common ownership or financial control. 13. On-call shift. The term on-call shift means any time period other than an employee's regular shift when the employer requires the employee to be available to work, regardless of whether the employee actually works and regardless of whether the employer requires the employee to report to a work location. 14. Regular shift. The term regular shift means a span of consecutive hours starting when an employer requires an employee to report to a work location and ending when such employee is free to leave a work location. Breaks totaling two hours or less are not an interruption of consecutive hours, provided that such breaks do not include time when the employee's work location is closed. Regular shift does not include the hours worked by an employee who is called into work while on an on-call shift. 15. Retail employer. The term retail employer means any employer that employs a retail employee at a retail business. 16. The term retail business means any entity with 20 or more employees that is engaged primarily in the sale of consumer goods at one or more stores within the city. 17. Consumer Goods. For the purposes of this definition, consumer goods means products that are primarily for personal, household, or family purposes, including but not limited to appliances, clothing, electronics, groceries, and household items. In determining the number of employees performing work for a retail business for compensation, all employees performing work for compensation on a full-time, part-time or temporary basis shall be counted, provided that where the number of employees who work for an employer for compensation fluctuates, business size may be determined for the current calendar year based upon the average number of employees who worked for compensation per week during the preceding calendar year, and provided further that in determining the number of employees performing work for an employer that is a chain business, the total number of employees in that group of establishments shall be counted. 28. Retail employee. The term retail employee means any employee who is employed by a retail employer. 29. Schedule change premium. The term schedule change premium means money that an employer pays to an employee as compensation for changes the employer makes to the employee's work schedule, including: canceling, shortening or moving to another date and time shifts, including on-call shifts; adding additional hours to shifts already scheduled; adding previously unscheduled shifts to the work schedule; and not requiring employees to report to work during on-call shifts. Such payment is not wages earned for work performed by that employee but rather is in addition to wages. 30. Underground facilities. The term underground facilities means pipelines, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, manholes, vaults or other such facilities or their attachments, that have been installed underground to provide services or materials, including electricity, gas, water, steam liquid petroleum products, telephone communications, cable television, sewage removal or traffic control systems. 31. Utility safety employee. The term utility safety employee means any person who is employed by a utility safety employer to locate and mark underground facilities or inspect gas pipe fusions and joints. 32. Utility safety employer. The term utility safety employer means any person or entity that employs individuals to locate and mark underground facilities or inspect gas pipe fusions and joints. The term utility safety employer does not include (i) the United States government; (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state including the legislature and the judiciary; or (iii) the city or any local government, municipality or county or any entity governed by section 92 of the general municipal law or section 207 of the county law. 33. Work schedule. The term work schedule means the regular shifts and on-call shifts that an employer assigns to an employee and includes the dates, times and locations where an employer requires an employee to work. The commissioner shall conduct outreach and education about the provisions of this chapter. Such outreach and education shall be provided to employers, employees and members of the public who are likely to be affected by this law. § 20-1203 Reporting. The commissioner shall report annually on the city's website, without revealing identifying information about any non-public matter or complaint, on the effectiveness of its enforcement activities under this chapter. The report shall include the following information: a. Administrative actions. 1. The number and nature of complaints received; 2. The results of investigations undertaken, including the number of complaints not substantiated and the number of notices of violations issued; 3. The number and nature of administrative adjudications; 4. The number of complaints resolved through mediation or conciliation, if any; and 5. The average time for a complaint to be resolved. b. Civil actions. The number, nature, and outcomes of civil actions commenced by the corporation counsel against employers involving violations under this chapter. § 20-1204 Retaliation. a. No person shall take any adverse action against an employee that penalizes such employee for, or is reasonably likely to deter such employee from, exercising or attempting to exercise any right protected under this chapter. Taking an adverse action includes threatening, intimidating, disciplining, discharging, demoting, suspending or harassing an employee, reducing the hours or pay of an employee, informing another employer that an employee has engaged in activities protected by this chapter, and discriminating against the employee, including actions related to perceived immigration status or work authorization. An employee need not explicitly refer to this chapter or the rights enumerated herein to be protected from retaliation. § 20-1205 Notice and posting of rights. a. The commissioner shall publish and make available notices for employers to post in the workplace or at any job site informing employees of their rights protected under each subchapter of this chapter before the effective date of the local law that added each corresponding subchapter. Such notices shall be made available in a downloadable format on the city's website in accordance with the requirements for language access as described in chapter 11 of title 23. The commissioner shall update such notices if any changes are made to the requirements of this chapter or as otherwise deemed appropriate by the director. b. In accordance with the rules of the department, every employer shall conspicuously post at any workplace or job site where any employee works the notices described in subdivision a of this section that are applicable to the particular workplace or job site. Such notices shall be in English and any language spoken as a primary language by at least five percent of employees at that location if the commissioner has made the notice available in that language. § 20-1206 Recordkeeping a. Employers shall retain records documenting their compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter for a period of three years and shall allow the department to access such records and other information, consistent with applicable law and in accordance with rules of the department and with appropriate notice, in furtherance of an investigation conducted pursuant to this chapter. b. An employer's failure to maintain, retain or produce a record or other information required to be maintained by this chapter and requested by the department in furtherance of an investigation conducted pursuant to this chapter that is relevant to a material fact alleged by the department in a notice of violation issued pursuant to this subchapter creates a rebuttable presumption that such fact is true. § 20-1207 Administrative enforcement; jurisdiction and complaint procedures. a. Jurisdiction. The commissioner shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. b. Complaints and investigations. 1. Any person, including any organization, alleging a violation of this chapter may file a complaint with the department within two years of the date the person knew or should have known of the alleged violation. 2. Upon receiving such a complaint, the department shall investigate it. 3. The department may open an investigation on its own initiative. 4. A person or entity under investigation shall, in accordance with applicable law, provide the department with information or evidence that the department requests pursuant to the investigation. If, as a result of an investigation of a complaint or an investigation conducted upon its own initiative, the department believes that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the department may attempt to resolve it through any action authorized by chapter 64 of the charter. Adjudicatory powers pursuant to this subchapter may be exercised by the commissioner or by the office of administrative trials and hearings pursuant to chapter 64 of the charter. 5. The department shall keep the identity of any complainant confidential unless disclosure is necessary to resolve the investigation or is otherwise required by law. The department shall, to the extent practicable, notify such complainant that the department will be disclosing the complainant's identity before such disclosure. § 20-1208 Specific administrative remedies for employees or former employees. a. For violations of this chapter, the department may grant the following relief to employees or former employees: 1. All compensatory damages and other relief required to make the employee or former employee whole; 2. An order directing compliance with the notice and posting of rights and recordkeeping requirements set forth in sections 20-1205 and 20-1206; and 3. For each violation of: (a) Section 20-1204, (1) Rescission of any discipline issued, reinstatement of any employee terminated and payment of back pay for any loss of pay or benefits resulting from discipline or other action taken in violation of section 20-1204; (2) $500 for each violation not involving termination; and (3) $2,500 for each violation involving termination; (b) Section 20-1221, $200 and an order directing compliance with section 20-1221; (c) Section 20-1222, payment of schedule change premiums withheld in violation of section 20-1222 and $300; (d) Section 20-1231, payment as required under section 20-1231, $500 and an order directing compliance with section 20-1231; (e) Section 20-1241, $300 and an order directing compliance with section 20-1241; (f) Subdivision a of section 20-1251, the greater of $500 or such employee's actual damages; (g) Subdivisions a and b of section 20-1252, $300; and (h) Subdivision a or b of section 20-1262, $500 and an order directing compliance with such subdivision, provided, however, that an employer who fails to provide an employee with the written response required by subdivision a of section 20-1262 may cure the violation without a penalty being imposed by presenting proof to the satisfaction of the department that it provided the employee with the required written response within seven days of the department notifying the employer of the opportunity to cure. b. For each violation of section 20-1272, the department shall order reinstatement or restoration of hours of the fast food employee, unless waived by the fast food employee. The department may, in addition, grant the following relief: $500 for each violation, an order directing compliance with section 20-1272, rescission of any discipline issued, payment of back pay for any loss of pay or benefits resulting from the wrongful discharge, and any other equitable relief as may be appropriate. c. The relief authorized by this section shall be imposed on a per employee and per instance basis for each violation. a. For each violation of this chapter, an employer is liable for a penalty of $500 for the first violation and, for subsequent violations that occur within two years of any previous violation of this chapter, up to $750 for the second violation and up to $1,000 for each succeeding violation. b. The penalties imposed pursuant to this section shall be imposed on a per employee and per instance basis for each violation. § 20-1210 Enforcement by the corporation counsel. The corporation counsel or such other persons designated by the corporation counsel on behalf of the department may initiate in any court of competent jurisdiction any action or proceeding that may be appropriate or necessary for correction of any violation issued pursuant to sections 20-1207 through 20-1209, including actions to secure permanent injunctions, enjoining any acts or practices that constitute such violation, mandating compliance with the provisions of this chapter or such other relief as may be appropriate. § 20-1211 Private cause of action. a. Claims. Any person, including any organization, alleging a violation of the following provisions of this chapter may bring a civil action, in accordance with applicable law, in any court of competent jurisdiction: 1. Section 20-1204; 2. Section 20-1221; 3. Subdivisions a and b of section 20-1222; 4. Section 20-1231; 5. Subdivisions a, b, d, f and g of section 20-1241; 6. Section 20-1251; 7. Subdivisions a and b of section 20-1252; and 8. Section 20-1272. b. Remedies. Such court may order compensatory, injunctive and declaratory relief, including the following remedies for violations of this chapter: 1. Payment of schedule change premiums withheld in violation of section 20-1222; 2. An order directing compliance with the recordkeeping, information, posting and consent requirements set forth in sections 20-1205, 20-1206 and 20-1221; 3. Rescission of any discipline issued in violation of section 20-1204; 4. Reinstatement of any employee terminated in violation of section 20-1204; 5. Payment of back pay for any loss of pay or benefits resulting from discipline or other action taken in violation of section 20-1204; 6. Other compensatory damages and any other relief required to make the employee whole; and 7. Reasonable attorney's fees. c. For each violation of section 20-1272, the court shall order reinstatement or restoration of hours of the fast food employee, unless waived by the fast food employee, and shall order the fast food employer to pay the reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of the fast food employee. The court may, in addition, grant the following relief: $500 for each violation, an order directing compliance with section 20-1272, rescission of any discipline issued, payment of back pay for any loss of pay or benefits resulting from the wrongful discharge, punitive damages, and any other equitable relief as may be appropriate. d. Statute of limitations. A civil action under this section shall be commenced within two years of the date the person knew or should have known of the alleged violation. e. Relationship to department action. 1. Any person filing a civil action shall simultaneously serve notice of such action and a copy of the complaint upon the department. Failure to so serve a notice does not adversely affect any plaintiff's cause of action. 2. An employee need not file a complaint with the department pursuant to subdivision b of section 20-1207 before bringing a civil action; however, no person shall file a civil action after filing a complaint with the department unless such complaint has been withdrawn or dismissed without prejudice to further action. 3. No person shall file a complaint with the department after filing a civil action unless such action has been withdrawn or dismissed without prejudice to further action. 4. The commencement or pendency of a civil action by an employee does not preclude the department from investigating the employer or commencing, prosecuting or settling a case against the employer based on some or all of the same violations. § 20-1212 Civil action by corporation counsel for pattern or practice of violations. a. Cause of action. 1. Where reasonable cause exists to believe that an employer is engaged in a pattern or practice of violations of this chapter, the corporation counsel may commence a civil action on behalf of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction. 2. The corporation counsel shall commence such action by filing a complaint setting forth facts relating to such pattern or practice and requesting relief, which may include injunctive relief, relief for employees set forth in section 20-1208, civil penalties set forth in section 20-1209, and any other appropriate relief. 3. Such action may be commenced only by the corporation counsel or such other persons designated by the corporation counsel. 4. Nothing in this section prohibits (i) the department from exercising its authority under section 20-1207 through 20-1209, or (ii) a person alleging a violation of this chapter from filing a complaint pursuant to section 20-1207 or a civil action pursuant to section 20-1211, or requesting an arbitration proceeding pursuant to section 20-1273 based on the same facts pertaining to such a pattern or practice, provided that a civil action pursuant to this section shall not have previously been commenced. b. Investigation. The corporation counsel may initiate any investigation to ascertain such facts as may be necessary for the commencement of a civil action pursuant to subdivision a of this section, and in connection therewith shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, to administer oaths and to examine such persons as are deemed necessary. c. Civil penalty. In any civil action commenced pursuant to subdivision a of this section, the trier of fact may impose a civil penalty of not more than $15,000 for a finding that an employer has engaged in a pattern or practice of violations of this chapter. Any civil penalty so recovered shall be paid into the general fund of the city. Subchapter 2: Advance Scheduling and Schedule Change Premiums. § 20-1221 Advance scheduling. a. A fast food employer shall have scheduling practices that provide each fast food employee with a regular schedule that is a predictable, regular set of recurring weekly shifts the employee will work each week. No later than when a new fast food employee receives such employee's first work schedule, a fast food employer shall provide such employee with a written copy of their regular schedule including the number of hours a fast food employee can expect to work per week for the duration of the employee's employment and the expected days, times and locations of those hours. A fast food employer shall comply with sections 20-1241 and subdivision h of section 20-1272 before adding shifts to the regular schedule of a new or current fast food employee. If a long-term or indefinite change is made to the regular schedule, the fast food employer shall provide an updated copy of the regular schedule in writing to the affected employee as soon as possible and before such employee receives the first work schedule following the change. A fast food employer may not reduce the total hours in a fast food employee's regular schedule by more than 15% from the highest total hours contained in such employee's regular schedule at any time within the previous 12 months, unless the employee has previously consented to or requested such reduction in writing, or the reduction was consistent with the restrictions on discharges pursuant to subchapter 7 of this title. b. A fast food employer shall provide a fast food employee with written notice of a work schedule containing regular shifts and on-call shifts on or before the employee's first day of work. For all subsequent work schedules, the fast food employer shall provide such notice no later than 14 days before the first day of any new schedule. Such work schedule shall span a period of no less than seven days and contain all anticipated regular shifts and on-call shifts that the employee will work or will be required to be available to work during the work schedule. The regular shifts and on-call shifts in any work schedule shall not vary by more than 15% from the shifts on the employee's regular schedule, unless the employee consented to or requested such changes in writing, or the change was consistent with the restrictions on discharges pursuant to subchapter 7 of this title. c. A fast food employer shall: 1. Provide fast food employees with written notice of the work schedule as required by subdivision b of this section by (i) posting the schedule in a conspicuous place at the workplace that is readily accessible and visible to all employees and (ii) transmitting the work schedule to each fast food employee, including by electronic means, if such means are regularly used to communicate scheduling information. The department may by rule establish requirements or exceptions necessary to ensure the privacy and safety of employees in connection with such posting and transmittal; 2. Update such schedule within 24 hours of the employer's knowledge of a change or as soon as practicable if the change is effective within 24 hours, provide the revised written schedule to the affected employees and re-post the schedule in accordance with paragraph one of this subdivision; and 3. Upon request by any fast food employee, and in accordance with the rules of the department, provide such employee with (i) such employee's work schedule in writing for any previous week worked for the past three years and (ii) the most current version of work schedules of all fast food employees who work at the same fast food establishment as the requesting employee, whether or not changes to the work schedule have been posted. d. A fast food employee may decline to work or be available to work additional hours not included in the initial written work schedule provided pursuant to subdivision b of this section. When a fast food employee consents to work or be available to work such hours, the employee's written consent must be obtained, which consent may be transmitted electronically or otherwise at or before the start of the shift. § 20-1222 Schedule change premium. § 20-1222 Schedule change premium. a. A fast food employer shall provide a fast food employee with the following schedule change premium amount, in addition to the employee's regular pay for shifts actually worked by the employee: 1. With less than 14 days' notice but at least 7 days' notice to the employee, $10 for each change to the work schedule in which: (a) Additional hours or shifts are added pursuant to subdivision d of section 20-1221; or (b) The date or start or end time of a regular shift or on-call shift is changed with no loss of hours; 2. With less than 14 days' notice but at least 7 days' notice to the employee, $20 for each change to the work schedule in which: (a) Hours are subtracted from a regular or on-call shift; or (b) A regular or on-call shift is cancelled; 3. With less than 7 days' notice to the employee, $15 for each change to the work schedule in which: (a) Additional hours or shifts are added pursuant to subdivision d of section 20-1221; or (b) The date or start or end time of a regular or on-call shift is changed with no loss of hours; 4. With less than 7 days' but at least 24 hours' notice to the employee, $45 for each change to the work schedule in which: (a) Hours are subtracted from a regular or on-call shift; or (b) A regular or on-call shift is cancelled; and 5. With less than 24 hours' notice to the employee, $75 for each change to the work schedule in which: (a) Hours are subtracted from a regular or on-call shift; or (b) A regular or on-call shift is cancelled. b. A fast food employer shall pay the schedule change premiums required under this subchapter at such time as the employer pays an employee wages owed for work performed during that work week. Schedule change premium pay shall be separately noted on a wage stub or other form of written documentation and provided to the employee for that pay period. c. Notwithstanding subdivisions a and b of this section, a fast food employer is not required to provide a fast food employee with the amounts set forth in such subdivisions in the event that: 1. The employer's operations cannot begin or continue due to: (a) Threats to the employees or the employer's property; (b) The failure of a public utility or the shutdown of public transportation; (c) A fire, flood or other natural disaster; (d) A state of emergency declared by the president of the United States, governor of the state of New York, or mayor of the city; or (e) Severe weather conditions that pose a threat to employee safety, although where a fast food employer adds shifts to an employee's schedule to cover for or replace another employee who cannot safely travel to work, such employer shall provide the replacing or covering employee with the amounts set forth in subdivision a of this section; 2. The employee requested in writing a change in schedule; 3. Two employees voluntarily traded shifts with one another, subject to any existing employer policy regarding required conditions for employees to exchange shifts; or 4. The employer is required to pay the employee overtime pay for a changed shift. Subchapter 3: Minimum Time Between Shifts § 20-1231 Minimum time between shifts. Unless the fast food employee requests or consents to work such hours in writing, no fast food employer shall require any fast food employee to work two shifts with fewer than 11 hours between the end of the first shift and the beginning of the second shift when the first shift ends the previous calendar day or spans two calendar days. The fast food employer shall pay the fast food employee $100 for each instance that the employee works such shifts. Subchapter 4: Access to Hours § 20-1241 Offering additional shifts to current fast food employees. a. 1. Before a fast food employer may hire new fast food employees, including hiring through the use of subcontractors, and before a fast food employer may offer or distribute shifts pursuant to paragraph 2 of this subdivision, a fast food employer shall make reasonable efforts to offer reinstatement or restoration of hours, as applicable, to any fast food employee discharged based on a bona fide economic reason within the previous 12 months, provided that the department may define in rules what constitutes sufficient advance notice and a reasonable effort to offer reinstatement or restoration of hours, including with respect to discharged fast food employees who have declined prior offers of reinstatement or restoration of hours. 2. If the job opening or additional shift is not filled pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision, before a fast food employer may hire new fast food employees, including hiring through the use of subcontractors, a fast food employer shall offer regular shifts or on call shifts that would otherwise be offered to a new fast food employee to the fast food employer's current fast food employees employed at all fast food establishments owned by the fast food employer, or at a subset of such fast food establishments as provided in rules promulgated pursuant to subdivision j of this section. A fast food employer may not transfer fast food employees from locations other than the location where such shifts will be worked or hire new fast food employees, including subcontractors, to perform the work of fast food employees for such shifts, except as provided for in subdivisions f, g and i of this section. b. When shifts become available that must be offered to current fast food employees pursuant to subdivision a, a fast food employer shall post a notice that states the number of shifts being offered; the schedule of the shifts; whether the shifts will occur at the same time each week; the length of time such fast food employer anticipates requiring coverage of the shifts; the number of fast food employees needed to cover the shifts; the process, date and time by which fast food employees may notify such fast food employer of their desire to work the shifts; the criteria such fast food employer will use for the distribution of the shifts; an advisement that a fast food employee may accept a subset of the shifts offered but that shifts will be distributed according to the criteria described in the notice; and an advisement that while fast food employees working at all locations owned by the fast food employer may accept offered shifts immediately, shifts will be distributed first to fast food employees currently employed at the location where the shifts will be worked. The fast food employer shall post such notice for three consecutive calendar days in a conspicuous and accessible location where notices to fast food employees are customarily posted, unless a shorter posting period is necessary in order for the work to be timely performed as may be prescribed by the rules of the commissioner. The fast food employer shall also provide the notice in writing directly to each fast food employee electronically. c. Subject to distribution of shifts pursuant to subdivision d, a fast food employee employed at any location owned by the fast food employer offering shifts may accept shifts immediately and may accept any subset of shifts offered. d. A fast food employer shall distribute shifts, in accordance with the criteria contained in the notice required by subdivision b, to one or more fast food employees who have accepted such shifts and are employed at the location where such shifts will be worked. A fast food employer shall distribute shifts to fast food employees employed at locations other than the location where such shifts will be worked in accordance with subdivision f. A fast food employer's system for the distribution of shifts shall not violate any federal, state or local law, including laws that prohibit discrimination. e. A fast food employee's written acceptance of an offer of shifts constitutes written consent to the addition of shifts if such consent is required by subdivision d of section 20-1221, but does not constitute a written request for a change in schedule as described in paragraph 2 of subdivision c of section 20-1222. A fast food employer shall pay a schedule change premium to fast food employees who accept additional shifts offered pursuant to this section when required by section 20-1222. f. If no fast food employee who is employed at the location where offered shifts will be worked accepts such shifts within three consecutive calendar days of the offer, or, in the case of shifts that are offered with less than three days' notice to a fast food employee before the start of such shifts, no less than 24 hours before the start of such shifts unless such 24 hour period is impracticable under the circumstances, the fast food employer may distribute such shifts to fast food employees from other locations who accept such shifts or may hire or contract for such new fast food employees as are necessary to perform the work described in, and in accordance with the criteria contained in, the notice posted pursuant to subdivision b; provided, however, that the fast food employer shall distribute such shifts to fast food employees from other locations who have accepted such shifts before such employer proceeds to hire or contract for new fast food employees for such shifts. In the case of shifts that are offered with less than 24 hours' notice to a fast food employee, the fast food employer shall wait as long as practicable under the circumstances before distributing such shifts to fast food employees from other locations or hiring or contracting for new fast food employees. g. 1. If in accordance with subdivision b a fast food employer provides notice of additional shifts to all of its fast food employees and receives written confirmation from all fast food employees employed at the location where such hours will be worked before the expiration of the period for their acceptance pursuant to subdivision f that those fast food employees do not accept the shifts offered, or if some such fast food employees have accepted some but not all of the offered shifts and the fast food employer receives written confirmation from all other fast food employees employed at such location before the expiration of the period for their acceptance pursuant to subdivision f that they do not accept the shifts offered, such fast food employer may immediately distribute such shifts to fast food employees from other locations who accept such shifts in accordance with the criteria set forth in the notice posted pursuant to subdivision b. 2. If in accordance with subdivision b a fast food employer provides notice of additional shifts to all of its fast food employees employed at all locations owned by the fast food employer or at a subset of such fast food establishments as provided in rules promulgated pursuant to subdivision j, and receives written confirmation from all such fast food employees before the expiration of the period for their acceptance pursuant to subdivision f that they do not accept the shifts offered, or if some such fast food employees have accepted some but not all of the offered shifts and the fast food employer receives written confirmation from all other fast food employees employed at all locations owned by that fast food employer or at a subset of such fast food establishments as provided in rules promulgated pursuant to subdivision j before the expiration of the period for their acceptance pursuant to subdivision f that they do not accept the shifts offered, the fast food employer may immediately proceed with hiring or contracting for new fast food employees to perform the work described in, and in accordance with the criteria set forth in, the notice posted pursuant to subdivision b. h. A fast food employer is encouraged to make reasonable efforts to offer fast food employees training opportunities to gain the skills and experience to perform work for which such employer regularly has additional needs. i. This subchapter shall not be construed to require any fast food employer to offer, or prohibit any fast food employer from offering, any fast food employee any shift or hours that must be paid: 1. At a rate not less than one and one-half times the fast food employee's regular rate of pay under 29 U.S.C. § 207(a); or 2. At a rate governed by the overtime requirements of the labor law or the overtime requirements of any minimum wage order promulgated by the New York commissioner of labor pursuant to labor law article 19 or 19-A. j. The commissioner may promulgate rules regarding how and to which fast food employees offers of shifts pursuant to subdivision g shall be made by fast food employers that own at least 50 fast food establishments in the city based on the geographic distribution of such establishments. Subchapter 5: On-Call Scheduling § 20-1251 On-call scheduling prohibited. a. Except as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for a retail or utility safety employer to: 1. Schedule a retail or utility safety employee for any on-call shift; 2. Cancel any regular shift for a retail or utility safety employee within 72 hours of the scheduled start of such shift; 3. Require a retail or utility safety employee to work with fewer than 72 hours' notice, unless the employee consents in writing; or 4. Require a retail or utility safety employee to contact a retail or utility safety employer to confirm whether or not the employee should report for a regular shift fewer than 72 hours before the start of such shift. b. Notwithstanding subdivision a of this section, a retail or utility safety employer may: 1. Grant a retail or utility safety employee time off pursuant to an employee's request; 2. Allow a retail or utility safety employee to trade shifts with another retail or utility safety employee; 3. Make changes to retail employees' work schedules with less than 72 hours' notice if the retail employer's operations cannot begin or continue due to: (a) Threats to the retail employees or the retail employer's property; (b) The failure of public utilities or the shutdown of public transportation; (c) A fire, flood or other natural disaster; or (d) A state of emergency declared by the president of the United States, governor of the state of New York or mayor of the city; and 4. Make changes to utility safety employees' work schedules with less than 72 hours' notice if the utility safety employer is responding to or cannot begin or continue operations due to one of the following circumstances: (a) The failure of public utilities that poses an immediate danger to public safety or health; (b) A fire, flood or other natural disaster; or (c) A state of emergency declared by the president of the United States, governor of the state of New York or mayor of the city. § 20-1252 Work schedules. a. A retail or utility safety employer shall provide a retail or utility safety employee with a written work schedule no later than 72 hours before the first shift on the work schedule. b. A retail employer shall conspicuously post in a location that is accessible and visible to all retail employees at the work location the work schedule of all the retail employees at that work location at least 72 hours before the beginning of the scheduled hours of work and shall update the schedule and directly notify affected retail employees after making changes to the work schedule. Retail and utility safety employers shall also transmit the work schedule by electronic means, if such means are regularly used to communicate scheduling information. The department may by rule establish requirements or exceptions necessary to ensure the privacy and safety of employees. c. Upon request by a retail or utility safety employee, a retail or utility safety employer shall provide the employee with such employee's work schedule in writing for any week worked within the prior three years and the most current version of the work schedule for all retail or utility safety employees at that work location, whether or not changes to the work schedule have been posted. §20-1253 Collective bargaining agreements. The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to any retail or utility safety employee covered by a valid collective bargaining agreement, including an agreement that is open for negotiation, if (i) such provisions are expressly waived in such collective bargaining agreement and (ii) the agreement addresses employee scheduling. Subchapter 6: Temporary Changes to Work Schedules for Personal Events and Protections from Retaliation for Making Schedule Change Requests § 20-1261 Definitions. a. For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Business day. The term business day means any 24-hour period when an employer requires employees to work at any time. Caregiver. The term caregiver means a person who provides direct and ongoing care for a minor child or a care recipient. Care recipient. The term care recipient means a person with a disability who (i) is a family member or a person who resides in the caregiver's household and (ii) relies on the caregiver for medical care or to meet the needs of daily living. Minor child. The term minor child means a child under the age of 18. Personal event. The term personal event means (i) the need for a caregiver to provide care to a minor child or care recipient; (ii) an employee's need to attend a legal proceeding or hearing for subsistence benefits to which the employee, a family member or the employee's care recipient is a party; or (iii) any circumstance that would constitute a basis for permissible use of safe time or sick time as set forth in section 20-914. b. For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the same meanings as those set forth in section 20-912: calendar year, child, family member and paid safe/sick time. § 20-1262 Required temporary changes and other requests for changes to a work schedule. a. An employer shall grant an employee's request for a temporary change to the employee's work schedule relating to a personal event in accordance with the following provisions, with a temporary change meaning a limited alteration in the hours or times that or locations where an employee is expected to work, including, but not limited to, using paid time off, working remotely, swapping or shifting work hours and using short-term unpaid leave: 1. On request, the employer must grant a request for a temporary change to the employee's work schedule under this section two times in a calendar year for up to one business day per request. The employer may permit the employee to use two business days for one request, in which case the employer need not grant a second request. 2. An employee who requests such a change: (a) Shall notify such employee's employer or direct supervisor as soon as the employee becomes aware of the need for a temporary change to the work schedule and shall inform the employer or supervisor that the change is due to a personal event; (b) Shall make a proposal for the temporary change to the work schedule, unless the employee seeks leave without pay; and (c) Need not put the initial request in writing, but as soon as is practicable, and no later than the second business day after the employee returns to work following the conclusion of the temporary change to the work schedule, the employee must submit the request in writing, indicating the date for which the change was requested and that it was due to the employee's personal event. The employer may require that such request be submitted in electronic form if employees of the employer commonly use such electronic form to request and manage leave and schedule changes. If the employee fails to submit the written request, the employer's obligation to respond in writing pursuant to paragraph 3 of this subdivision is waived. 3. An employer who receives such an initial request shall respond immediately, but need not put such initial response in writing. As soon as is practicable, and no later than 14 days after the employee submits the request in writing, the employer shall provide a written response, which may be in electronic form if such form is easily accessible to the employee. An employer's written response shall include: (a) Whether the employer will agree to the temporary change to the work schedule in the manner requested by the employee, or will provide the temporary change to the work schedule as leave without pay, which does not constitute a denial; (b) If the employer denies the request for a temporary change to the work schedule, an explanation for the denial; and (c) How many requests and how many business days pursuant to this subchapter the employee has left in the calendar year after taking into account the employer's decision contained in the written response. 4. An employer may deny a request for a temporary change to the employee's work schedule relating to a personal event only if the employee has already exhausted the two allotted requests in the calendar year pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision a of this section or if an exemption set forth in section 20-1263 applies. b. An employee may request, and in so doing is protected by the provisions of subchapter 1 of this chapter, and an employer may grant or deny, a change to a work schedule other than the temporary changes an employer is required to grant under subdivision a of this section. An employee request for such other change to a work schedule and an employer response to such a request shall follow the procedure in paragraphs 2 and 3 of subdivision a of this section to the extent applicable and as set forth in rules promulgated by the commissioner. c. 1. An employee need not use leave accrued under chapter 8 of this title before requesting schedule changes under this subchapter. 2. Unpaid leave granted for a personal event pursuant to this subchapter does not count toward an employer's obligation to grant leave under chapter 8 of this title. 3. Leave granted under chapter 8 of this title does not count toward an employer's obligation to grant leave under this section. 4. Nothing in this subchapter affects an employer's obligation to provide a reasonable accommodation in the form of a change to a work schedule required pursuant to other laws or regulations or to otherwise comply with the requirements of other laws or regulations, including, but not limited to, those requirements contained in title 8. §20-1263 Exemptions. This subchapter does not: a. Apply to any employee who: 1. Is covered by a valid collective bargaining agreement if such agreement waives the provisions of this subchapter and addresses temporary changes to work schedules; 2. Has been employed by the employer for fewer than 120 days; 3. Is employed by any employer whose primary business for which that employee works is the development, creation or distribution of theatrical motion pictures, televised motion pictures, television programs or live entertainment presentations, except for an employee whose primary duty is the performance of office or non-manual work directly related to the management or general business operations of the employer or the employer's customers and except for an employee whose primary duty is performing routine mental, manual, mechanical or physical work in connection with the care or maintenance of an existing building or location used by the employer; or 4. Works fewer than 80 hours in the city in a calendar year. b. Preempt, limit or otherwise affect the applicability of any provisions of any other law, regulation, requirement, policy or standard, other than a collective bargaining agreement, that provides comparable or superior benefits for employees to those required herein. § 20-1264 Outreach and education. a. The commissioner shall conduct an ongoing outreach and education campaign about the provisions of this subchapter. 1. Such outreach and education shall be provided to employers, employees and members of the public who are likely to be affected by this law. 2. The department shall develop and distribute to employers written and electronic materials containing information related to this subchapter. 3. Employers shall distribute written and electronic materials created by the department directly to their employees in both electronic and print format. b. The materials required by this section shall be made available in English and the designated citywide languages as provided in section 23-1101. Subchapter 7: Wrongful Discharge of Fast Food Employees § 20-1271 Definitions. As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Bona fide economic reason. The term bona fide economic reason means the full or partial closing of operations or technological or organizational changes to the business in response to the reduction in volume of production, sales, or profit. Discharge. The term discharge means any cessation of employment, including layoff, termination, constructive discharge, reduction in hours and indefinite suspension. Just cause. The term just cause means the fast food employee's failure to satisfactorily perform job duties or misconduct that is demonstrably and materially harmful to the fast food employer's legitimate business interests. Probation period. The term probation period means a defined period of time, not to exceed 30 days from the first date of work of a fast food employee, within which fast food employers and fast food employees are not subject to the prohibition on wrongful discharge set forth in section 20-1272. Progressive discipline. The term progressive discipline means a disciplinary system that provides for a graduated range of reasonable responses to a fast food employee's failure to satisfactorily perform such fast food employee's job duties, with the disciplinary measures ranging from mild to severe, depending on the frequency and degree of the failure. Reduction in hours. The term reduction in hours means a reduction in a fast food employee's hours of work totaling at least 15 percent of the employee's regular schedule or 15 percent of any weekly work schedule. Seniority. The term seniority means a ranking of employees based on length of service, computed from the first date of work, including any probationary period, unless such service has been interrupted by more than six months, in which case length of service shall be computed from the date that service resumed. An absence shall not be deemed an interruption of service if such absence was the result of military service, illness, educational leave, leave protected or afforded by law, or any discharge based on a bona fide economic reason or that is in violation of any local, state or federal law, including this subchapter. § 20-1272 Prohibition on wrongful discharge. a. A fast food employer shall not discharge a fast food employee who has completed such employer's probation period except for just cause or for a bona fide economic reason. b. In determining whether a fast food employee has been discharged for just cause, the fact-finder shall consider, in addition to any other relevant factors, whether: 1. The fast food employee knew or should have known of the fast food employer's policy, rule or practice that is the basis for progressive discipline or discharge; 2. The fast food employer provided relevant and adequate training to the fast food employee; 3. The fast food employer's policy, rule or practice, including the utilization of progressive discipline, was reasonable and applied consistently; 4. The fast food employer undertook a fair and objective investigation into the job performance or misconduct; and 5. The fast food employee violated the policy, rule or practice or committed the misconduct that is the basis for progressive discipline or discharge. c. Except where termination is for an egregious failure by the employee to perform their duties, or for egregious misconduct, a termination shall not be considered based on just cause unless (1) the fast food employer has utilized progressive discipline; provided, however, that the fast food employer may not rely on discipline issued more than one year before the purported just cause termination, and (2) the fast food employer had a written policy on progressive discipline in effect at the fast food establishment and that was provided to the fast food employee. d. Within 5 days of discharging a fast food employee, the fast food employer shall provide a written explanation to the fast food employee of the precise reasons for their discharge. In determining whether a fast food employer had just cause for discharge, the fact-finder may not consider any reasons proffered by the fast food employer but not included in such written explanation provided to the fast food employee. e. The fast food employer shall bear the burden of proving just cause or a bona fide economic reason by a preponderance of the evidence in any proceeding brought pursuant to this subchapter, subject to the rules of evidence as set forth in the civil practice law and rules or, where applicable, the common law. f. In any action or proceeding brought pursuant to sections 20-1207, 20-1211, or 20-1273, if a fast food employer is found to have unlawfully discharged a fast food employee in violation of this subchapter the relief shall include an order to reinstate or restore the hours of the fast food employee, unless waived by the fast food employee, and, in any such proceeding brought pursuant to 20-1211 or 20-1273 where a fast food employer is found to have unlawfully discharged a fast food employee in violation of this subchapter, the fast food employer shall be ordered to pay the reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of the fast food employee. g. A discharge shall not be considered based on a bona fide economic reason unless supported by a fast food employer's business records showing that the closing, or technological or reorganizational changes are in response to a reduction in volume of production, sales, or profit. h. Discharges of fast food employees based on bona fide economic reason shall be done in reverse order of seniority in the fast food establishment where the discharge is to occur, so that employees with the greatest seniority shall be retained the longest and reinstated or restored hours first. In accordance with section 20-1241, a fast food employer shall make reasonable efforts to offer reinstatement or restoration of hours, as applicable, to any fast food employee discharged based on a bona fide economic reason within the previous twelve months, if any, before the fast food employer may offer or distribute shifts to other employees or hire any new fast food employees. § 20-1273 Arbitration. a. On or after January 1, 2022, any person or organization representing persons alleging a violation of this subchapter by a fast food employer may bring an arbitration proceeding. In addition, the department may, to the extent permitted by any applicable law including the civil practice law and rules, provide by rule for persons bringing such a proceeding to serve as a representative party on behalf of all members of a class. Such a proceeding must be brought within 2 years of the date of the alleged violation. If the arbitrator finds that the fast food employer violated the provisions of this subchapter, it shall (i) require the fast food employer to pay the reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of the fast food employee, (ii) require the fast food employer to reinstate or restore the hours of the fast food employee, unless the employee waives reinstatement, (iii) require the fast food employer to pay the city for the costs of the arbitration proceeding, and (iv) award all other appropriate equitable relief, which may include back pay, rescission of discipline, in addition to other relief, and such other compensatory damages or injunctive relief as may be appropriate. b. A person or organization bringing an arbitration proceeding under subdivision a must serve the arbitration demand, and any amendments thereto, on the fast food employer either in person or via certified mail at the current or most recent fast food establishment where each fast food employee named in the arbitration demand is or was employed, or pursuant to the rules for service specified in article 3 of the civil practice law and rules. Such arbitration demand must include a general description of each alleged violation but need not reference the precise section alleged to have been violated. c. The parties to an arbitration proceeding shall jointly select the arbitrator from a panel of arbitrators. The number of arbitrators on the panel shall be determined by the department. The arbitrators on the panel shall be chosen by a committee of eight participants established by the department and comprised of: 1. Four employee-side representatives, including fast food employees or advocates; and 2. Four employer-side representatives, including fast food employers or advocates. d. If an insufficient number of employee-side and employer-side representatives agree to participate in the committee pursuant to subdivision c of this section, the department shall consult with those that have agreed to participate and select individuals to fill the requisite number of openings on the committee. e. If the committee established pursuant to subdivision c of this section is unable to select a sufficient number of arbitrators for the panel as determined by the department, the department shall select the remaining arbitrators. f. If the parties are unable to agree on an arbitrator, the department shall select an arbitrator from the panel. g. The department shall provide interpretation services to any party requiring such services for the arbitration hearing. h. The arbitration hearing shall be held at a location designated by the department or a location agreed to by the parties and the arbitrator. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, such arbitration shall be subject to the labor arbitration rules established by the American arbitration association and the rules promulgated by the department to implement this subchapter. In case of a conflict between the rules of the American arbitration association and the rules of the department, the rules of the department shall govern. Any rules promulgated by the department implementing this section shall be consistent with the requirement that in any arbitration conducted pursuant to this section, the arbitrator shall have appropriate qualifications and maintain personal objectivity, and each party shall have the right to present its case, which shall include the right to be in attendance during any presentation made by the other party and the opportunity to rebut or refute such presentation. i. If a fast food employee brings an arbitration proceeding, arbitration shall be the exclusive remedy for the wrongful discharge dispute and there shall be no right to bring or continue a private cause of action or administrative complaint under this subchapter, unless such arbitration proceeding has been withdrawn or dismissed without prejudice. j. Each party shall have the right to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for the confirmation, modification or vacatur of an award pursuant to article 75 of the civil practice law and rules, as such article applies, pursuant to applicable case law, to review of legally mandated arbitration proceedings in accordance with standards of due process. § 20-1274 Applicability of schedule change premiums. A discharged fast food employee who loses a shift on a work schedule as a result of discharge, including employees whose employment is terminated for any reason, shall be entitled to schedule change premiums for each such lost shift pursuant to section 20-1222. § 20-1275 Exceptions. This subchapter shall not: a. Apply to any fast food employee who is currently employed within a probation period; b. Limit or otherwise affect the applicability of any right or benefit conferred upon or afforded to a fast food employee by the provisions of any other law, regulation, rule, requirement, policy or standard including but not limited to any federal, state or local law providing for protections against retaliation or discrimination. Chapter 13: Pay Deductions for Contributions to Not-for-Profit Organizations. § 20-1301 Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: 1. Chain. The term chain means a set of establishments that share a common brand or that are characterized by standardized options for decor, marketing, packaging, products and services. 2. Commissioner. The term commissioner means the commissioner of consumer and worker protection. 3. Department. The term department means the department of consumer and worker protection. 4. Employee. The term employee means any person covered by the definition of employee set forth in subdivision 5 of section 651 of the labor law or any person covered by the definition of employee set forth in 29 U.S.C. § 203(e), any person covered by the definition of an employee set forth in subsection (3) of 29 U.S.C. § 152, any person covered by the definition of public employee in subdivision 7 of section 201 of the civil service law, or any person covered by the definition of employees in subdivision 3 of section 701 of the labor law and who is employed within the city and who performs work on a full-time or part-time basis, including work performed in a transitional jobs program pursuant to section 336-f of the social services law, but not including work performed as a participant in a work experience program pursuant to section 336-c of the social services law. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the term employee does not include any person who is employed by (i) the United States government; (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state including the legislature and the judiciary; or (iii) the city or any local government, municipality or county or any entity governed by section 92 of the general municipal law or section 207 of the county law. Employer. The term employer means any person or entity covered by the definition of employer set forth in subdivision 6 of section 651 of the labor law or any person or entity covered by the definition of employer set forth in in 29 U.S.C. § 203(d), any person or entity covered by the definition of employer set forth in subsection (2) of 29 U.S.C. § 152, any person or entity covered by the definition of a public employer in subdivision 6 of section 201 of the civil service law, or any person or entity covered by the definition of employer in subdivision 2 of section 701 of the labor law. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the term does not include (i) the United States government; (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state including the legislature and the judiciary; or (iii) the city or any local government, municipality or county or agency or other body thereof. Fast food employee. The term fast food employee means any employee employed or permitted to work at or for a fast food establishment that is located within the city, by any employer, where such job duties include at least one of the following: customer service, cooking, food or drink preparation, delivery, security, stocking supplies or equipment, cleaning or routine maintenance. 5. Fast food employer. The term fast food employer means any employer that employs a fast food employee at a fast food establishment. 6. Fast food establishment. The term fast food establishment means any establishment (i) that has as its primary purpose serving food or drink items; (ii) where patrons order or select items and pay before eating and such items may be consumed on the premises, taken out or delivered to the customer's location; (iii) that offers limited service; (iv) that is part of a chain; and (v) that is one of 30 or more establishments nationally, including (A) an integrated enterprise that owns or operates 30 or more such establishments in the aggregate nationally or (B) an establishment operated pursuant to a franchise where the franchisor and the franchisees of such franchisor own or operate 30 or more such establishments in the aggregate nationally. The term fast food establishment includes such establishments located within non-fast food establishments. 7. Franchise. The term franchise has the same definition as set forth in section 681 of the general business law. 8. Franchisee. The term franchisee means a person or entity to whom a franchise is granted. 9. Franchisor. The term franchisor means a person or entity who grants a franchise to another person or entity. 10. Integrated enterprise. The term integrated enterprise means two or more entities sufficiently integrated so as to be considered a single employer as determined by application of the following factors: (i) degree of interrelation between the operations of multiple entities; (ii) degree to which the entities share common management; (iii) centralized control of labor relations; and (iv) degree of common ownership or financial control. 11. Not-for-profit. The term not-for-profit means an entity that is organized under the not-for-profit corporation law or the law governing incorporation of not-for-profit organizations in the jurisdiction of its incorporation. § 20-1302 Requirement to deduct and remit voluntary contributions to not-for-profits. a. A fast food employer shall, upon authorization from a fast food employee and upon receipt of a registration letter as provided in subdivision b of section 20-1303 pertaining to the relevant not-for-profit, deduct voluntary contributions from such fast food employee's paycheck and remit them to the not-for-profit designated by such fast food employee. An authorization shall be written, whether on paper or by an electronic or other method prescribed by the commissioner, and shall include: 1. The fast food employee's signature; 2. The fast food employee's name and physical address; 3. The amount, frequency and start date of the contribution; 4. The name, physical address, email address, web address, if any, and phone number of the not-for-profit and a contact for an employee who seeks to revoke authorization and 5. A statement notifying the fast food employee that contributions are voluntary and that the authorization to deduct is revocable at any time by submitting a written revocation to the not-for-profit. b. An authorization may be submitted to a fast food employer by either a not-for-profit or a fast food employee. c. An authorization is in effect until the fast food employee revokes the authorization in writing, whether on paper or by an electronic or other method prescribed by the commissioner, to the not-for-profit. The not-for-profit shall transmit the revocation to the fast food employer. d. The fast food employer shall provide a copy of any authorization and any revocation to the not-for-profit to which it pertains and to the fast food employee who submitted it within five business days of receipt. e. The fast food employer shall begin or end deductions no later than the first pay period after 15 days of receipt of the authorization or of receipt of the revocation. In the case of authorization, the fast food employer shall remit the deductions to the not-for-profit, by the method of transmission that such organization requests, no later than 15 days after deduction. Deductions may only be taken from paychecks issued after the date the fast food employer receives the authorization, and the deduction amount from any one paycheck shall not exceed the maximum amount specified by the fast food employee. The fast food employer must comply with state law regarding notation of deductions on fast food employees' statements of wages. f. A fast food employer is not required to honor an authorization for a contribution to a not-for-profit: 1. Of less than $6 per paycheck if the fast food employee is paid every two weeks, or less than $3 per paycheck if the fast food employee is paid every week; or 2. More than once per pay period. g. Processing fee. Upon request by a fast food employer, the not-for- profit shall reimburse the fast food employer for the costs associated with deduction and remittance, as calculated pursuant to rules of the department. h. Written notice of rights and obligations. A fast food employer shall provide written notice to its fast food employees of their rights and of the fast food employer's obligations under this section on a form provided by the department. Such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the fast food establishment. Such notice shall include a statement that labor organizations as defined by the national labor relations act, employee organizations as defined by subdivision 5 of section 201 of the civil service law, and labor organizations as defined in subdivision 5 of section 701 of the labor law are not permitted to seek remittances under this chapter pursuant to subdivision b of section 20-1310. § 20-1303 Registration by not-for0profits required. a. Before it may accept deductions pursuant to this chapter, a not-for- profit shall register with the department by providing the following in the manner prescribed by the department: 1. The name, physical address, email address, web address, if any, and phone number of the not-for-profit and a contact; 2. Proof of status as a not-for-profit that has not been suspended or dissolved pursuant to the laws of the state of its incorporation; 3. Facially valid written authorizations in the form described in subdivision a of section 20-1302 from at least 500 fast food employees, though such authorizations need not be from employees employed by the same fast food employer; 4. Proof that the not-for-profit has provided the information required by section 20-1304 to the fast food employee; and 5. The not-for-profit organization's form 990 of the Internal Revenue Service of the United States Department of the Treasury or other equivalent tax filing for the three most recent tax years for which such form was filed. b. The department shall issue a registration letter to the registered not- for-profit confirming that it has met the conditions required to trigger the requirements of this chapter. A not-for-profit or fast food employee seeking to have a fast food employer make payroll deductions pursuant to this chapter must provide a copy of the department's registration letter to the relevant fast food employer along with the request for such deductions authorization. a. Before any deduction pursuant to this chapter is made, the not-for- profit shall provide the relevant fast food employee the following information concerning its operations: 1. Name, contact, physical address, email address, web address, if any, and phone number; 2. Information about the not-for-profit's governance, which shall include any officers and directors and may include members or shareholders as the director shall require; 3. Information about the not-for-profit's mission, programs and areas of focus; 4. When prescribed by the commissioner, a list of the not-for-profit's employees; 5. Information about the not-for-profit's finances, including its sources of funding, budget and expenditures; and 6. A statement that labor organizations as defined by the national labor relations act, employee organizations as defined by subdivision 5 of section 201 of the civil service law, and labor organizations as defined in subdivision 5 of section 701 of the labor law are not permitted to seek remittances under this chapter pursuant to subdivision b of section 20-1310. b. The not-for-profit may satisfy the disclosure requirements of this section by the conspicuous posting of the information on a single webpage on the website of the covered not-for-profit dedicated to fulfilling the disclosure requirements of this section, provided that the website address of such page is included on the authorization described in section 20-1302 or other written document provided to the fast food employee and that such website address is preceded by language indicating that legally required disclosures are contained there. § 20-1305 Recordkeeping. a. A fast food employer must keep records of the following for two years: 1. Deduction authorizations and revocations made pursuant to this chapter; 2. Remittances pursuant to this chapter; 3. Deductions pursuant to this chapter; 4. A copy of the authorization required by subdivision d of section 20-1302; 5. Proof of distribution of the notice to fast food employees required by subdivision h of section 20-1302; b. The failure to keep records required by this section creates an inference that such records would be unfavorable to that fast food employer, and a factfinder may use such inference to establish facts in support of a final determination pursuant to sections 20-1307 and 20-1308. § 20-1306 Retaliation prohibited. No person shall take any adverse action against a fast food employee that penalizes such employee for, or is reasonably likely to deter such employee from, exercising or attempting to exercise any right protected under this chapter. Taking an adverse action includes threatening, intimidating, disciplining, discharging, demoting, suspending or harassing a fast food employee, reducing the hours or pay of a fast food employee, informing another employer that a fast food employee has engaged in activities protected by this chapter, and discriminating against the fast food employee, including actions related to perceived immigration status or work authorization. A fast food employee need not explicitly refer to this chapter or the rights enumerated herein to be protected from retaliation. § 20-1307 Enforcement. a. The department shall investigate potential violations and enforce the provisions of this chapter consistent with section 2203 of the charter and with all powers and duties described therein and according to rules and policies of the department. b. Violations by fast food employers. 1. Except as provided in subdivision c of this section, an aggrieved fast food employee or duly authorized representative thereof or an aggrieved not-for-profit may file a complaint with the department regarding violations of this chapter by a fast food employer. Except for an allegation of retaliation in violation of section 20-1306, the department shall only investigate such a complaint if the relevant not-for-profit demonstrates that it has complied with sections 20-1303 and 20-1304 by providing a copy of the registration letter. 2. Except as otherwise provided in subdivision c of this section, if a fast food employer is found to have violated this chapter, including by retaliation, the department may award any of the following, in addition to any other remedy provided in the charter or other law: (a) Deductions and remittances as authorized by the fast food employee and the payment of interest to the not-for-profit from the date of the failure to deduct or remit based on the interest rate then in effect as prescribed by the superintendent of banks pursuant to section 14-a of the banking law, but in any event at a rate of no less than six percent per year; and (b) Payment of a further sum as a civil penalty in an amount not exceeding $500 for each violation of this chapter. However, in cases where a final disposition has been entered against a fast food employer twice within any consecutive three-year period determining that such fast food employer has willfully failed to deduct or remit funds in accordance with this chapter, or has retaliated against a fast food employee in violation of section 20-1306, the department may impose a civil penalty in an amount not exceeding $1,000 for each violation of this chapter. (c) Reinstatement, back pay and other appropriate relief for any fast food employee found to have been subject to retaliation in violation of section 20-1306. 3. In assessing an appropriate remedy, due consideration shall be given to the gravity of the violation, the history of previous violations, and the good faith of the fast food employer. No procedure or remedy set forth in this section is exclusive of or a prerequisite for asserting a claim for relief to enforce any rights under this chapter in a court of competent jurisdiction. c. Failure to honor a revocation. A fast food employer or a not-for-profit that the department finds has failed to honor the revocation of a fast food employee of voluntary deductions and instead has retained contributions after revocation shall refund the fast food employee the amount of the contribution wrongfully retained. If the refund to the fast food employee is not made within 60 days of receipt of the revocation by the party that retained the contribution, the department may require the payment of interest on the amount of the refund owed based on the rate then in effect as prescribed by the superintendent of banks pursuant to section 14-a of the banking law, but in any event at a rate of no less than six percent per year. d. False or misleading disclosures to fast food employees. It is a violation of this chapter for a not-for-profit intentionally to make materially false or misleading disclosures to fast food employees under subdivision a of section 20-1304, and as set forth in rules prescribed by the commissioner. Where a violation is established, such not-for-profit shall cure the false or misleading statements to fast food employees within 30 days. Upon establishing a second such violation within two years of a previous violation, the commissioner shall revoke any previously issued letter of registration as set forth in subdivision b of section 20-1303. e. The department shall make rules establishing a process for such interested parties as the department may identify by rule to petition the commissioner to re-examine or revoke a not-for-profit's registration pursuant to this chapter. f. Any party with rights under this chapter may bring an action pursuant to article 78 of the civil practice law and rules to enforce, vacate or modify an order, determination or other disposition of the department, the office of administrative trials and hearings or other relevant tribunal. § 20-1308 Civil action. a. Except as otherwise provided by law, any person claiming to be aggrieved by a fast food employer's violation of this chapter has a cause of action in any court of competent jurisdiction for damages, including punitive damages, and for injunctive relief and such other remedies as may be appropriate, if the relevant not-for-profit demonstrates that it has complied with sections 20-1303 and 20-1304 by providing a copy of the registration letter from the department unless such person has filed a complaint with the department with respect to such claim. If the court finds in favor of the plaintiff, it shall award such person, in addition to other relief, reasonable attorney's fees and costs. b. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of subdivision a of this section, if the department dismisses a complaint or the complaint is withdrawn, an aggrieved person maintains all rights to commence a civil action pursuant to this section. 1. An employee need not file a complaint with the department before bringing a civil action; however, no person shall file a civil action after filing a complaint with the department unless such complaint has been withdrawn or dismissed without prejudice to further action. 2. No person shall file a complaint with the department after filing a civil action unless such action has been withdrawn or dismissed without prejudice to further action. c. A civil action under this section shall be commenced in accordance with subdivision 2 of section 214 of the civil practice law and rules. d. This chapter does not limit a fast food employee's right to bring any other action authorized by law. § 20-1309 Limitations period. The department shall not investigate violations of this chapter committed more than two years before the filing of a complaint or the commencement of such investigation, whichever is earlier. Each failure to comply with this chapter constitutes a separate violation; a pattern of such violations is a continuing violation for purposes of assessing the limitations period. § 20-1310 Application; exclusion of labor organizations. a. This chapter does not discourage, prohibit, preempt or displace any law, regulation, rule, requirement, written policy or standard that is at least as protective of a fast food employee as the requirements of this chapter. b. This chapter does not authorize deductions prohibited by section 193 of the labor law or remittances to labor organizations. For purposes of this subdivision, the term labor organization shall mean: 1. A labor organization as defined in subdivision 5 of section 701 of the labor law; 2. An employee organization as defined in subdivision 5 of section 201 of the civil service law; or 3. A labor organization within the meaning of subsection (5) of 29 U.S.C. § 152, which defines a labor organization as any organization of any kind, or any agency or employee representation committee or plan, in which employees participate and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employment, or conditions of work, as such definition is interpreted by the national labor relations board. c. The department shall promulgate rules necessary to ensure that this law will be applied in a manner consistent with federal or state labor law and will not affect the relationship among workers or employees and employers, and the entities described in subdivision b, except as specifically provided in this chapter. Chapter 14: Savings Access New York — Board and Program for Private Sector Employee Retirement Savings §20-1401 Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following definitions: 1. Account. The term account means an individual retirement savings account established by the retirement savings program. 2. Administrator. The term administrator means any person that has entered into an agreement with the retirement savings board to implement and maintain a retirement savings program or components of such program. More than one person may perform the functions of the administrator, and duties applicable to the administrator shall also apply to persons with whom the administrator contracts to implement such program or components. 3. Comptroller. The term comptroller means the comptroller of the city of New York. Covered employee. The term covered employee means any employee as defined in subdivision 2 of section 190 of the labor law: (i) who is twenty-one years of age or older; (ii) who is employed for compensation by a covered employer in a position in which he or she is regularly scheduled to work at least 20 hours per week; and (iii) whose regular duties occur in the city, consistent with any rules promulgated by the retirement savings board pursuant to section 20-1408. 4. Covered employer. The term covered employer means any employer as defined in subdivision 3 of section 190 of the labor law that (i) employs no fewer than five employees whose regular duties occur in the city, consistent with any rules promulgated by the retirement savings board pursuant to section 20-1408; (ii) has employed no fewer than five such employees without interruption for the previous calendar year; (iii) has been in continuous operation for at least two years; and (iv) has not offered or maintained in the preceding two years a retirement plan, provided that an entity described in clauses (i) through (iv) in the definition of participating employer shall not constitute a covered employer. 5. IRA. The term IRA means either an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity established under section 408 (traditional) or 408A (Roth) of the internal revenue code. Other eligible employer. The term other eligible employer means an employer as defined in subdivision 3 of section 190 of the labor law that is authorized to offer the retirement savings program to its employees pursuant to subdivision m of section 20-1405 or any rule promulgated by the retirement savings board pursuant to section 20-1408. 6. Other eligible individual. The term other eligible individual means a self-employed individual or an employee as defined in subdivision 2 of section 190 of the labor law who is not a covered employee: (i) who is twenty-one years of age or older; and (ii) who is permitted to enroll in the retirement savings program pursuant to subdivision l or m of section 20-1405 or pursuant to any rule promulgated by the retirement savings board pursuant to section 20-1408. 7. Participant. The term participant means a covered employee enrolled in the retirement savings program or any other eligible individual who is enrolled in the retirement savings program pursuant to subdivision l or m of section 20-1405 or pursuant to any rule promulgated by the retirement savings board pursuant to section 20-1408. 8. Participating employer. The term participating employer shall mean any covered employer and any other eligible employer that chooses to offer the retirement savings program to its employees pursuant to subdivision m of section 20-1405 or any rule promulgated by the retirement savings board pursuant to section 20-1408; provided that (i) the United States government, (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state including the legislature and the judiciary, (iii) the city or any local government or municipality, or (iv) any public corporation as defined by section 65 of the general construction law shall not constitute a participating employer. 9. Person. The term person means a person as defined in subdivision ten of section 1-112. 10. Retirement plan. The term retirement plan means a qualified retirement plan under section 401(a) of the internal revenue code, section 403(a), section 403(b), section 408(k), or section 408(p) of the internal revenue code; or a savings incentive match plan for employees of small employers (SIMPLE IRA Plan or SIMPLE 401(k) plan); a simplified employee pension (SEP); a salary reduction simplified employee pension (SARSEP); a payroll deduction IRA; or the New York state secure choice savings program established pursuant to section 1301 of the general business law. 11. Retirement savings board. The terms retirement savings board or board mean the retirement savings board established by section 20-1402. 12. Retirement savings program. The terms retirement savings program or program mean the retirement savings program established pursuant to section 20-1403, which will also be called the Savings Access New York Retirement Program. § 20-1402 Establishment of the retirement savings board; membership. a. There shall be a retirement savings board, which shall consist of three members. The members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor. b. In making such appointments, the mayor may consider factors, including, but not limited to, the following: 1. Experience in the field of retirement plan administration; 2. Actuarial or demographics experience; 3. Representation of covered employees, other eligible individuals, or participants; and 4. Representation of covered employers, other eligible employers, or participating employers. c. The mayor shall designate one member of the board to act as the chair. d. Board members shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and shall not receive compensation for work on such board. e. The board shall meet not less than once every quarter and whenever deemed necessary by at least two members of the board. f. The mayor may designate one or more agencies to provide staffing and other administrative support to the board. g. Within appropriations therefor, the board may appoint one or more employees, including an executive director who may assign and supervise board staff. The board may delegate powers and functions to such employees, or to staff of agencies designated by the mayor pursuant to subdivision f of this section. § 20-1403 Establishment of the retirement savings program. Subject to applicable federal and state law, the board, in coordination with the comptroller with respect to the authority described in section 20-1406, shall establish a retirement savings program as set forth by this chapter, either directly or indirectly through agreement with an administrator pursuant to section 20-1405, for the purpose of promoting greater retirement savings for individuals in the New York city private sector. The program shall be designed and operated in a manner that will cause it not to constitute an employee benefit plan within the meaning of section 3(3) of the employee retirement income security act of 1974. § 20-1404 Certification authorized. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this chapter, the board shall not implement a retirement savings program as set forth by this chapter if: a. the board certifies to the mayor and speaker in writing that the state establishes a retirement savings program that requires a substantial portion of employers who would otherwise be covered employers to offer to their employees the opportunity to contribute to accounts through payroll deduction or other method of contribution; or b. the corporation counsel certifies to the mayor and speaker in writing that there is a substantial likelihood that such program conflicts with, or is preempted by, state or federal law, including the employee retirement income security act of 1974, or constitutes an employee benefit plan under such act; or c. the director of management and budget and the comptroller each certify to the mayor and speaker in writing that establishment and implementation of such program would create a material risk of a substantial additional monetary liability or obligation for, or an enforceable guarantee by, the city or its agencies, officers or employees, beyond the ordinary costs of administration. § 20-1405 Powers of the retirement savings board. Subject to applicable federal and state law, including its duties as a fiduciary, the board may: a. After consultation with the comptroller, determine the date upon which the program established pursuant to this chapter shall become operational and begin accepting contributions from participants, provided that such date shall be no later than two calendar years after the effective date of this chapter, unless the board determines that a further delay is reasonably necessary to ensure the effective operation of the program. The board shall provide notice of such determination to delay the program to the mayor, comptroller, and speaker no later than 90 days prior to two calendar years after the effective date of this chapter and shall indicate what conditions contribute to such determination and an approximation of the additional time required to ensure effective operation of the program, provided, however, that such time shall not be longer than six calendar months or an additional notice shall be required prior to the end of such time indicating the present circumstances and providing an updated date for the program to become operational. b. Delay implementation of the obligation imposed by subdivision a of section 20-1409 upon a covered employer, provided that: 1. such delay shall not exceed two years from the initial enrollment of covered employees; 2. such delay shall be based upon the practicability of implementation using the following criteria: i. the number of covered employees; ii. the size of the covered employer; or iii. the sector or industry of the covered employer; and 3. the board shall provide to the mayor and speaker and post on its website, the identity of any covered employer for whom implementation is delayed and the length of the delay granted. c. Enter into contracts, agreements, or arrangements with one or more administrators allowing such administrators to perform any functions of the board. Under any such contract, agreement, or arrangement, the board: (i) shall require an administrator to exercise the duties of a fiduciary in the administration of the program established by this chapter, (ii) shall require an administrator to comply with any standards concerning the receipt and safekeeping of such funds as may be issued by the comptroller pursuant to section 20-1406, (iii) shall require an administrator to incorporate and offer the investments selected by the comptroller pursuant to section 20-1406, and (iv) may require an administrator to assume legal responsibility and liability pursuant to this chapter for functions to be performed by an administrator. d. Enter into any contracts, agreements, or arrangements with any person deemed qualified by the board and create any written instruments necessary, including, but not limited to, trust agreements, to create IRAs for participants in compliance with the internal revenue code. Under any such contracts, agreements, arrangements, or written instruments, the assets of IRAs established for participants: shall be combined for the purpose of making investments directed by the comptroller pursuant to section 20-1406; shall be managed and administered for the exclusive purposes of providing benefits to participants and defraying reasonable expenses of administering, maintaining, and managing such investments of the program, including, but not limited to, the expenses of the board and the comptroller; shall at all times be preserved, invested, and expended solely for the purposes of the program and no property rights therein shall exist in favor of the city or any participating employer; shall be received and held in compliance with standards concerning the receipt and safekeeping of such assets as may be issued by the comptroller pursuant to section 20-1406; shall not be transferred or used by the city for any purposes other than the purposes of the program or funding the expenses of operating the program; shall not constitute property of the city; and shall not be commingled with city funds, and the city shall have no claim to or against, or interest in, the trust assets. The board and any such person shall be fiduciaries with respect to the IRAs established and maintained under the program to the extent required by applicable law or any such contract, agreement, arrangement, or written instrument. e. Enter into any other contracts, agreements, or arrangements for, and retain or employ, the services of any other person deemed qualified by the board to carry out the purposes of this chapter, subject to the authority of the comptroller pursuant to section 20-1406. f. Allow participants to allocate assets of their IRAs among investment options and designate an investment option as a default investment for the IRAs of covered employees who do not make an investment choice. g. Establish a default type of IRA, Roth or traditional, for covered employees and identify the types of IRA that any other eligible individual who enrolls in the program will be permitted to select. h. Maintain fees and costs to participants at a level determined by the board to be reasonable, consistent with the purpose of this chapter. i. Educate and provide outreach to covered employers, other eligible employers, covered employees, and other eligible individuals. j. Seek loans, grants, or other contributions to offset or finance fees or costs for the administration of the retirement savings program on an ongoing basis from financial firms, institutions, or government entities. k. Implement escalation or reduction of participants' default contribution rates, where applicable, from time to time, provided that the board shall notify participants at least 45 days in advance of such escalation or reduction. If such escalation or reduction is adopted, the board shall permit affected participants to opt out of such escalation or reduction. l. Establish a process by which a covered employee or other eligible individual may voluntarily enroll in and contribute to the program. m. Establish a process by which an employer that is not a covered employer may voluntarily offer the program to its employees and allow those employees to enroll in and contribute to the program. n. Establish a process by which a covered employer may seek a hardship exemption from this chapter, which may be obtained by demonstrating to the board's satisfaction that participation would be unduly burdensome for the employer. o. Establish a process by which participating employers who cease to be covered employers, for example, by offering the New York State Secure Choice Program to their employees, may discontinue their participation in the program. p. To the extent consistent with law and the authority of the comptroller under section 20-1406, establish and maintain the program by: contracting, partnering, or forming a consortium with one or more states, local governments, or organizations of governmental entities, in which certain aspects of each such entity's program are combined for administrative convenience and efficiency, provided that in any such case, the auto-IRA program used, the joint program or the consortium otherwise satisfies the requirements of this chapter. q. Establish procedures and requirements, which may apply to participating employers and any other employer as defined in subdivision 3 of section 190 of the labor law, to enable the board, or the enforcement agency designated pursuant to section 20-1414, to ascertain whether such an employer is subject to the provisions of this chapter. r. Approve an investment strategy and policy, which shall define one or more investment options that participants may choose to invest in, and any modifications to such strategy and policy pursuant to subdivision a of section 20-1406. s. Take all other actions consistent with this chapter that are necessary and appropriate to carry out its purposes. § 20-1406 Powers of the comptroller. Subject to applicable federal and state law, including the comptroller's duties as a fiduciary to the extent required by applicable law, the comptroller shall: a. Establish an investment strategy and policy, provided that such strategy and policy shall be subject to the approval of the board. The underlying investments or investment funds selected or authorized pursuant to this section to implement such strategy, policy, and investment options shall be diversified by the comptroller consistent with such strategy and policy so as to minimize the risk of large losses under the circumstances. The comptroller may, at any time, modify such strategy, policy, and investment options, subject to the approval of the board. b. Direct the underlying investments or investment funds implementing the investment policy and strategy and investment options established pursuant to subdivision a of this section. Such underlying investments may include, without limitation, shares of mutual funds and exchange-traded funds, publicly-traded equity and fixed-income securities, and other investments available for investment by the program. When selecting and authorizing such investments, the comptroller shall consult with the board and any person retained by the board pursuant to section 20-1405 and shall, not less than once every quarter and prior to any meeting of the board that may be scheduled during such quarter pursuant to subdivision e of section 20-1402, issue a report to the board describing its activities undertaken pursuant to this section and the performance of the investments or investment funds selected or authorized pursuant to this section. The comptroller shall respond within a reasonable time to any questions raised by the board about such report. c. Enter into any contracts, agreements, or arrangements, as the comptroller may deem appropriate, with any person deemed qualified by the comptroller to assist in the selection and authorization of investments or to provide such investments or investment management services. Under any such contract, agreement or arrangement, the comptroller shall require such person to exercise the duties of a fiduciary with respect to the selection and authorization of such investments and may require such person to assume legal responsibility and liability pursuant to this chapter for functions to be performed by such person. d. Issue standards, as the comptroller may deem appropriate, concerning the receipt and safekeeping of any funds of participants held by the board or any person retained by the board pursuant to section 20-1405. e. Establish, consistent with applicable law, a plan to promote the retention of the services of minority- and women-owned business enterprises for the program. f. Conduct the annual financial audit of the retirement savings program required by subdivision a of section 20-1412 or enter into any contracts, agreements, or arrangements with any person deemed qualified by the comptroller to conduct such audit, provided that the comptroller shall take such action as may be necessary to ensure that any audit concerning subdivisions a, b, c, d, or e of this section shall be undertaken by a person independent of the comptroller. § 20-1407 Elements of the retirement savings program. Subject to applicable federal and state law and except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the retirement savings program shall include the following elements: a. Allow covered employees and other eligible individuals to contribute to an IRA established under the retirement savings program through payroll deduction or any other method of contribution established by the retirement savings board. b. Apply to all participating employers. c. Require all participating employers to offer covered employees the opportunity to contribute to accounts established by the program through payroll deduction or any other method of contribution established by the retirement savings board. d. Provide for the automatic enrollment of covered employees and allow such employees to opt out of the program. e. Establish a default contribution rate of five percent of a covered employee's wages, subject to any increase or decrease of such rate authorized by the board pursuant to subdivision k of section 20-1405. f. Permit a covered employee to change his or her contribution rate and permit any other eligible individual who enrolls in the program to establish a contribution rate as a percent of his or her wages, which rate such individual may later change, or make lump-sum contributions to the program. g. Include a process for withdrawals by, and disbursements to, participants and provide participants options for such withdrawals and disbursements, including lump-sum or periodic payments. h. Take measures to protect the confidentiality of account and participant information. i. Provide that employers shall not contribute to accounts of participants or endorse or otherwise promote the program in a manner that would cause the program to become an employee benefit plan under the employee retirement income security act of 1974. j. Maintain, or require the maintenance of, separate records and accounting for each account established pursuant to this chapter. k. Provide for reports on the status of accounts to be provided to participants no less than once per year and upon request of any participant. l. Allow participants who have become ineligible to participate in the program to maintain or withdraw account balances or roll over such balances into other retirement accounts, subject to any applicable penalties and limitations established by federal law. m. Allow participants to terminate participation in the program and maintain or withdraw account balances or roll over such balances into other retirement accounts, subject to any applicable penalties and limitations established by federal law. n. Refrain from requiring any participating employer to perform any duty or offer any guarantee not otherwise authorized by this chapter. In addition, the board shall not establish any guarantee by, or duty on behalf of, the city except as otherwise required by law or authorized by this chapter. o. Allocate administrative fees to IRAs in the program. To the extent consistent with the purpose of this chapter and practicable, all fees required for the administration of the retirement savings program shall be borne by participants or paid through funds received pursuant to subdivision j of section 20-1405. § 20-1408 Rulemaking. The board and the comptroller may each promulgate rules to implement the provisions of this chapter concerning their respective powers. a. Such rules may establish variations from the requirements otherwise established by this chapter in order to ensure that this program does not conflict with, and is not otherwise preempted by, state or federal law, including the employee retirement income security act of 1974, and to ensure that this program does not constitute an employee benefit plan under such act, provided that such variations are not inconsistent with the overall purpose and policy of this chapter. b. Such rules may include any provisions necessary to ensure exemption from the employee retirement income security act of 1974. § 20-1409 Participating employer obligations. a. A covered employer shall enroll each of its covered employees in the retirement savings program established by this chapter by a date to be determined by the board. b. A participating employer shall be required to remit funds deducted from the earnings of each participant for deposit in the retirement savings program periodically on the earliest practicable date, consistent with rules promulgated by the board pursuant to section 20-1408. § 20-1410 No guarantees permitted; potential losses. Except as otherwise required by federal or state law, no person including, but not limited to, a participating employer, any person retained by the board pursuant to section 20-1405, a member of the retirement savings board, the board itself, the comptroller, any person retained by the comptroller pursuant to section 20-1406, the city, or any representative of any of the preceding shall guarantee a rate of return or interest for any contribution made to the retirement savings program. In addition, neither participating employers, the board, its members, the comptroller, nor the city or any representative of the board, its members or the city shall be liable for any loss incurred by a participant, or any other individual or corporation, as a result of participating in the retirement savings program; further, any liability of an administrator for any such loss shall be confined to the liability defined by this chapter or by the agreement between the board and an administrator. § 20-1411 Information and disclaimers to covered employees, other eligible individuals, and participants. In addition to any other information or disclaimers that the board deems appropriate in furtherance of this chapter, the board shall make available to covered employees, other eligible individuals, and participants: a. the following information in plain language and in the designated citywide languages, as defined in section 23-1101: 1. The benefits and risks associated with enrolling in the retirement savings program; 2. Any applicable procedures regarding contributions to the retirement savings program and procedures regarding opting out of such program; 3. Any applicable procedures regarding increasing or decreasing the rate or amount of contribution; 4. Options and processes for withdrawing account balances; 5. Any applicable procedures regarding obtaining additional information about the retirement savings program; 6. Any applicable procedures regarding making complaints about non- compliance by covered employers or other concerns regarding the program; 7. Information regarding the right of covered employees, other eligible individuals, and participants to seek financial advice concerning retirement savings from financial advisers, tax advisers, or other qualified individuals; and 8. Fund profiles, including fees, for each of the available investment options; and b. the following disclaimers in plain language and in the designated citywide languages, as defined in section 23-1101: 1. Participating employers, the retirement savings board and its members, the comptroller, and the city and its representatives are not authorized to provide financial advice; 2. The program is not an employee benefit plan under the employee retirement income security act of 1974; 3. Participating employers, the retirement savings board and its members, the comptroller, and the city and its representatives are not liable for any loss incurred by a participant, as a result of participating in the retirement savings program; 4. Participating employers, the retirement savings board and its members, the comptroller, and the city and its representatives will not monitor and are not obliged to monitor any participant's eligibility under the internal revenue code to make contributions to an IRA; and 5. Neither the program, the principal investment, any return on investment nor any interest rate is guaranteed by participating employers, the retirement savings board or its members, the comptroller, or the city or its representatives except as otherwise required by federal or state law. § 20-1412 Annual report and audit. a. The retirement savings program shall undergo an annual financial audit by or at the direction of the comptroller. b. No later than three months after the end of a calendar year and annually thereafter, the board, in consultation with the comptroller, shall make available on the city's website an annual report that shall describe and summarize the activities of the board and the comptroller. That report shall include but not be limited to: 1. the total number of participants; 2. the total number of covered employees and other eligible individuals in the city; 3. the total number of participants enrolled during the previous year; 4. the demographics and income levels of participants, to the extent reasonably ascertainable; 5. the number of covered employees who opted out of the retirement savings program during the subject year; 6. the number and type of civil penalties imposed by the enforcement agency pursuant to section 20-1414, for violating the requirements of this chapter; 7. the total assets under management in the retirement savings program; 8. fund profiles, investment objectives, assets under management and performance measures, such as rates of return, for each of the investment options provided by the retirement savings program for the subject year; and 9. the total cost of administering the program during the subject year. c. The data required to be included in this annual report will also be made available on the city's website in a non-proprietary format that permits automated processing. § 20-1413 Participating employer record retention. Each participating employer shall retain annual records documenting such employer's compliance with the requirements of this chapter for a period of three years unless otherwise required pursuant to any other law, rule, or regulation, and shall allow the agency or agencies designated by the mayor pursuant to section 20-1402 or 20-1414 to access such records upon request, provided that such access shall be obtained in accordance with applicable law. In addition, such agency or agencies may require a participating employer to provide electronic or paper copies of records upon request. § 20-1414 Enforcement. a. Designated office or agency. The mayor shall designate an office or agency to enforce sections 20-1409 and 20-1413. For purposes of this section, such office or agency shall be referred to as the enforcement agency. b. Violations and penalties. 1. A participating employer who violates subdivision a or b of section 20-1409 or any rule implementing such subdivisions shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than $250 for such violation, provided that the civil penalty for a violation that occurs within two years of any previous violation shall be not more than $500 for the second violation, and not more than $1,000 for any subsequent violation within the two-year period. A violation constitutes a failure to comply with subdivision a or b of section 20-1409 with respect to each covered employee or other eligible individual. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this subdivision, a participating employer who violates section 20-1413 or any rule implementing such section shall be liable for a civil penalty of $100 for each such violation. A violation constitutes a failure to comply with the requirements of such section or any rule implementing such section with respect to each covered employee or other eligible individual. 3. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2 of this subdivision, an employer, whether participating or non-participating, found to be in violation of any requirement of this chapter not specified in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this subdivision, or of any rule implementing this chapter not specified in such paragraphs, shall be liable for a civil penalty of $100 for each such violation. A violation constitutes a failure to comply with any such requirement of this chapter or any rule implementing such requirement with respect to each covered employee or other eligible individual. c. Enforcement. 1. Any covered employee or other eligible individual alleging a violation described in subdivision b of this section may file a complaint with the enforcement agency within one year of the date such employee learned or should have learned of the alleged violation. 2. The enforcement agency may, at any time after the filing of a complaint, resolve the complaint by any method of dispute resolution, unless such complaint is withdrawn by the complainant. 3. The enforcement agency shall keep complainants reasonably notified regarding the status of their complaint. 4. If, as a result of an investigation of a complaint or an investigation conducted upon its own initiative, the enforcement agency believes that a violation has occurred, it may issue a notice of violation to the participating employer. The notice of violation shall be returnable to the office of administrative trials and hearings. Such office shall have the power to impose the penalties described by subdivision b of this section, and to order any appropriate legal and equitable relief with respect to a covered employee or other eligible individual in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter, provided that the enforcement agency may reserve to itself the power to issue final decisions, determinations and orders, after receiving the recommendation of such office, on matters other than findings of fact. 5. The enforcement agency may settle a notice of violation at any time prior to the conclusion of an adjudication, provided that any complainant who opts out of such settlement may withdraw his or her complaint and exercise a private right of action pursuant to subdivision d of this section. d. Private Right of Action. 1. Any covered employee or other eligible individual alleging a violation described in paragraph 1 or 2 of subdivision b of this section may bring a civil action or proceeding pursuant to this section against a participating employer only when: (A) such covered employee or other eligible individual has filed a complaint with the enforcement agency pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision c of this section arising out of the same facts and circumstances, the enforcement agency has not, within four months, either resolved such complaint with the consent of the complainant or issued a notice of violation, and such employee or individual has withdrawn such complaint; (B) such covered employee or other eligible individual has filed a complaint with the enforcement agency pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision c of this section arising out of the same facts and circumstances, has opted out of a settlement reached by such agency, and has withdrawn such complaint; or (C) the enforcement agency has terminated the administrative proceeding prior to a decision of the office of administrative trials and hearings on the merits of the complaint. 2. The remedy in any civil action or proceeding undertaken pursuant to this subdivision may include any appropriate legal or equitable relief with respect to a covered employee or other eligible individual in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter, including recovery of costs and reasonable attorneys' fees. 3. Where the corporation counsel has brought a civil action or proceeding pursuant to subdivision e of this section against a participating employer alleging violations described in subdivision b of this section, a covered employee or other eligible individual shall not bring a civil action or proceeding pursuant to this subdivision, arising out of the same facts and circumstances, against such employer, unless such covered employee or other eligible individual has obtained the consent of the corporation counsel. e. The corporation counsel may bring a civil action or proceeding against any employer: 1. to impose the civil penalties authorized by subdivision b of this section and compel compliance with this chapter or restrain or prevent any violation described in such subdivision or any continuance of any such violation, and to recover costs and reasonable attorneys' fees; and 2. to obtain any appropriate legal or equitable relief with respect to any covered employee or other eligible individual harmed by any violation described in subdivision b of this section. § 20-1415 Discontinuation of the retirement savings program. a. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this chapter, in the event of the occurrence of the events described in subdivision b of this section and after reasonable advance notification to the mayor and speaker, the board and the comptroller shall take all necessary steps to discontinue the retirement savings program established pursuant to this chapter. Such steps shall include, but not be limited to, informing participants of available appropriate investment alternatives, allowing participants to transfer or roll over the balance of their accounts into such other appropriate investment accounts, or otherwise paying out account balances according to participants' instructions, subject to possible penalties and limitations established by federal law. b. Any of the following events shall serve as a basis for the discontinuation of the retirement savings program: 1. the board certifies to the mayor and speaker in writing that the state has established a retirement savings program that requires a substantial portion of employers who would otherwise be covered employers to offer to their employees the opportunity to contribute to accounts through payroll deduction or other method of contribution; or 2. the corporation counsel certifies to the mayor and speaker in writing that there is a substantial likelihood that such program conflicts with, or is preempted by, state or federal law, including the employee retirement income security act of 1974, or constitutes an employee benefit plan under such act; or 3. the director of management and budget and the comptroller each certify to the mayor and speaker in writing that establishment and implementation of such program would create a material risk of a substantial additional monetary liability or obligation for, or an enforceable guarantee by, the city or its agencies, officers or employees, beyond the ordinary costs of administration. Chapter 15: Third-Party Service Workers Subchapter 1: General Provisions § 20-1501 Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: Food delivery worker. The term food delivery worker means any natural person or any organization composed of no more than one natural person, whether or not incorporated or employing a trade name, who is hired, retained, or engaged as an independent contractor by a third-party food delivery service required to be licensed pursuant to section 20-563.1 or a third-party courier service to deliver food, beverage, or other goods from a business to a consumer in exchange for compensation. Food service establishment. The term food service establishment means a business establishment located within the city where food is provided for individual portion service directly to the consumer whether such food is provided free of charge or sold, and whether consumption occurs on or off the premises or is provided from a pushcart, stand or vehicle. Third-party courier service. The term third-party courier service means a service that (i) facilitates the same-day delivery or same-day pickup of food, beverages, or other goods from a food service establishment on behalf of such food service establishment or a third-party food delivery service; (ii) that is owned and operated by a person other than the person who owns such food service establishment; and (iii) and is not a third-party food delivery service. Third-party food delivery service. The term third-party food delivery service means any website, mobile application, or other internet service that: (i) offers or arranges for the sale of food and beverages prepared by, and the same-day delivery or same-day pickup of food and beverages from, a food service establishment; and (ii) that is owned and operated by a person other than the person who owns such food service establishment. Trip. The term trip means the time spent, distance travelled, and route followed by a worker to provide delivery services to a consumer through a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service, including travel to a business, picking up the food, beverage, or other goods for delivery, and taking and depositing such delivery at a different location as requested. § 20-1502 Outreach and education. The commissioner shall conduct outreach and education about the provisions of this chapter. Such outreach and education shall be provided to food delivery workers, third-party food delivery services, and third-party courier services. § 20-1503 Reporting. The department shall annually report on its website the number and nature of the complaints received pursuant to this chapter, the results of investigations undertaken pursuant to this chapter, including the number of complaints not substantiated and the number of notices of violations issued, the number and nature of adjudications held to resolve notices of violation issued pursuant to this chapter, and the average time for a complaint to be resolved pursuant to this chapter. § 20-1504 Retaliation. No person shall take any adverse action against a food delivery worker that penalizes such worker for, or is reasonably likely to deter such worker from, exercising or attempting to exercise any right protected under this chapter. Adverse actions include threats, intimidation, harassment, discipline, denial of work opportunities to or discrimination against a food delivery worker, reduction in hours or pay, reduction or downgrade of a worker's public or internal rating, and other negative consequences imposed on a food delivery worker, including actions related to perceived immigration status or work authorization. A food delivery worker need not explicitly refer to this chapter or the rights enumerated herein to be protected from retaliation. § 20-1505 Notice of rights. a. The commissioner shall publish and make available a notice for a third- party food delivery service or third-party courier service to provide to food delivery workers informing them of their rights protected under this chapter. Such notice shall be made available in a downloadable format on the city's website and shall be updated if any changes are made to the requirements of this chapter or as otherwise deemed appropriate by the commissioner. b. A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service shall provide such notice electronically to a food delivery worker hired, retained, or engaged by such service. Such notice shall be in English and any language spoken as a primary language by at least five percent of the food delivery workers hired, retained, or engaged by such service, provided that the commissioner has made the notice available in such language. § 20-1506 Recordkeeping. a. A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service shall retain records documenting its compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter for a period of three years and shall allow the department to access such records and other information, consistent with applicable law and in accordance with rules of the department and with appropriate notice, in furtherance of an investigation conducted pursuant to this chapter. A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service must maintain records in their original format and provide such records to the department in their original format or a machine-readable electronic format as set forth in rules of the department. The department also may establish by rule, and require third-party food delivery services and third- party courier services to adhere to, a uniform system of records, and require submission of such records and other reports as the department may determine, in accordance with applicable law and rules and with appropriate notice. b. The failure of a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service to maintain, retain, or produce a record or other information required to be maintained by this chapter and requested by the department in furtherance of an investigation conducted pursuant to this chapter that is relevant to a material fact alleged by the department in a notice of violation issued pursuant to this subchapter creates a rebuttable presumption that such fact is true. § 20-1507 Administrative enforcement. a. The commissioner shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. b. 1. Any person alleging a violation of this chapter may file a complaint with the department within two years of the date the person knew or should have known of the alleged violation. 2. Upon receiving such a complaint, the department shall investigate it. 3. The department may open an investigation on its own initiative. 4. A person or entity under investigation shall, in accordance with applicable law, provide the department with information or evidence that the department requests pursuant to the investigation. The department may attempt to resolve an investigation concerning a violation of this chapter through any action authorized by chapter 64 of the charter. 5. The department shall keep the identity of any complainant confidential unless disclosure is necessary to resolve the investigation or is otherwise required by law. The department shall, to the extent practicable, notify such complainant that the department will be disclosing the complainant's identity before such disclosure. c. The commissioner may promulgate rules necessary and appropriate to the administration of this chapter. § 20-1508 Remedies for workers. a. For violations of their rights under this chapter, a food delivery worker shall be entitled to the following relief: 1. all compensatory damages and other relief required to make the worker or former worker whole; 2. an order directing compliance with the requirements set forth in this chapter; and 3. for each violation of: (a) section 20-1504, (1) $500 for each violation not involving denial of future work opportunities; (2) $2,500 for each violation involving denial of future work opportunities; and (3) any equitable relief appropriate under the circumstances, including but not limited to payment of any lost earnings resulting from such retaliation. (b) section 20-1521, $200; (c) section 20-1522, including any minimum payment established by rule pursuant to section 20-1522, three times the amount of any payment that should have been made and was not timely made; (d) section 20-1523, $200; and (e) section 20-1524, $200. b. The relief authorized by this section shall be imposed on a per worker and per instance basis for each violation. § 20-1509 Civil penalties. a. For each violation of this chapter, a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service is liable for a penalty of $500 for the first violation and, for subsequent violations that occur within two years of any previous violation of this chapter, up to $750 for the second violation and up to $1,000 for each succeeding violation. b. The penalties imposed pursuant to this section shall be imposed on a per worker and per instance basis for each violation. § 20-1510 Enforcement by the corporation counsel. The corporation counsel or such other persons designated by the corporation counsel on behalf of the department may initiate in any court of competent jurisdiction any action or proceeding that may be appropriate or necessary for correction of any violation issued pursuant to sections 20-1507 through 20-1509, including actions to secure permanent injunctions, enjoining any acts or practices that constitute such violation, mandating compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or such other relief as may be appropriate. § 20-1511 Private cause of action. a. Any person alleging a violation of the following provisions of this chapter may bring a civil action, in accordance with applicable law, in any court of competent jurisdiction: 1. section 20-1504; 2. section 20-1521; 3. section 20-1522, including any minimum payment established by rule pursuant to section 20-1522; 4. section 20-1523; and 5. section 20-1524. b. Such court may order compensatory, injunctive and declaratory relief, including the remedies set forth in section 20-1508, and reasonable attorney's fees. c. A civil action under this section shall be commenced within two years of the date the person knew or should have known of the alleged violation. d. 1. Any person filing a civil action shall simultaneously serve notice of such action and a copy of the complaint upon the department. Failure to so serve a notice does not adversely affect any person's cause of action. 2. A worker need not file a complaint with the department pursuant to subdivision b of section 20-1507 before bringing a civil action; however, no person shall file a civil action after filing a complaint with the department unless such complaint has been withdrawn or dismissed without prejudice to further action. 3. No person shall file a complaint with the department after filing a civil action unless such action has been withdrawn or dismissed without prejudice to further action. 4. The commencement or pendency of a civil action by a worker does not preclude the department from investigating a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service or commencing, prosecuting or settling a case against a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service based on some or all of the same violations. § 20-1512 Civil action by corporation counsel for pattern or practice of violations. a. 1. Where reasonable cause exists to believe that a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service is engaged in a pattern or practice of violations of this chapter, the corporation counsel may commence a civil action on behalf of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction. 2. The corporation counsel shall commence such action by filing a complaint setting forth facts relating to such pattern or practice and requesting relief, which may include injunctive relief, relief for food delivery workers set forth in section 20-1508, civil penalties set forth in section 20-1509, and any other appropriate relief. 3. Such action may be commenced only by the corporation counsel or such other persons designated by the corporation counsel. 4. Nothing in this section prohibits (i) the department from exercising its authority under section 20-1507 through 20-1509 or (ii) a person alleging a violation of this chapter from filing a complaint pursuant to section 20-1507 or a civil action pursuant to section 20-1511 based on the same facts pertaining to such a pattern or practice, provided that a civil action pursuant to this section shall not have previously been commenced. b. Investigation. The corporation counsel may initiate any investigation to ascertain such facts as may be necessary for the commencement of a civil action pursuant to subdivision a of this section, and in connection therewith shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, to administer oaths and to examine such persons as are deemed necessary. Subchapter 2: Food Delivery Workers § 20-1521 Delivery distance and route. a. Each third-party food delivery service and third-party courier service shall provide each food delivery worker with the ability to specify: 1. the maximum distance per trip, from a food service establishment where such worker will pick up food, beverages, or other goods, that such worker will travel on trips; 2. that such worker will not accept trips that require travel over any bridge or over particular bridges chosen by such worker; and 3. that such worker will not accept trips that require travel through any tunnel or through particular tunnels chosen by such worker. b. Each third-party food delivery service and third-party courier service shall allow each food delivery worker to change the parameters established by such worker pursuant to subdivision a at any time. c. A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service shall not offer any food delivery worker any trip that is inconsistent with the parameters established by such worker and shall not penalize a food delivery worker for selecting or changing such parameters. d. Each time a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service offers a trip to a food delivery worker, before such worker accepts such trip, such third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service shall disclose to such worker the following information: 1. the address where the food, beverage or other goods must be picked up; 2. the estimated time and distance for the trip; 3. the amount of any gratuity, if specified by the consumer; and 4. the amount of compensation to be paid to the food delivery worker, excluding any gratuity. e. The requirements of this section shall apply to trips that originate in the city, end in the city or involve picking up food from a food service establishment located in the city. § 20-1522 Minimum payment. a. 1. The department shall study the working conditions for food delivery workers. In conducting such study, the department may coordinate with any other agency, organization, or office that can assist in such study. Such study shall include, at minimum, consideration of the pay food delivery workers receive and the methods by which such pay is determined, the total income food delivery workers earn, the expenses of such workers, the equipment required to perform their work, the hours of such workers, the average mileage of a trip, the mode of travel used by such workers, the safety conditions of such workers, and such other topics as the department deems appropriate. 2. In furtherance of such study, the department may request or issue subpoenas for the production of data, documents, and other information from a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service relating to food delivery workers that include, but are not limited to, worker identifiers, information about the times that such workers are available to work for such third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service, the mode of transportation such workers use, how trips are offered or assigned to food delivery workers, the data such service maintains relating to the trips of such workers, the compensation such workers receive from such third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service, any gratuities such workers receive, information relating to both completed and cancelled trips, agreements with or policies covering such workers, contact information of such workers, information relating to the setting of fees paid by food service establishments and consumers, and any other information deemed relevant by the department. In accordance with applicable law and rules and with appropriate notice, a third- party food delivery service or third-party courier service must produce such information to the department in its original format or a machine-readable electronic format as set forth in rules of the department. 3. Based on the results of the study conducted pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision, and no later than January 1, 2023, the department shall by rule establish a method for determining the minimum payments that must be made to a food delivery worker by a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service. In establishing such method, the department shall, at minimum, consider the duration and distance of trips, the expenses of operation associated with the typical modes of transportation such workers use, the types of trips, including the number of deliveries made during a trip, the on-call and work hours of food delivery workers, the adequacy of food delivery worker income considered in relation to trip-related expenses, and any other relevant factors, as determined by the department. Any rules promulgated by the department pursuant to this subdivision shall not prevent payments to food delivery workers from being calculated on an hourly or weekly basis, or by any other method, provided that the actual payments made to such workers comply with the minimum payment requirements determined by the department. b. Any minimum payment determined by the department pursuant to this section shall not include gratuities. A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service shall not retain any portion of any gratuity or use gratuities to offset or cover any portion of minimum payments required by this section. A third-party food delivery service shall clearly and conspicuously disclose to food delivery workers which payments constitute gratuities from consumers and which payments constitute compensation paid by the third-party food delivery service. c. Beginning February 1, 2024 and no later than February 1 of each year thereafter, the department shall announce any update to the minimum payment method established pursuant to this section if it determines an update is warranted or necessary. Any such update shall become effective the following April 1 after it has been announced. If the department determines that an amendment to the minimum payment standard is warranted or necessary, it is hereby authorized to promulgate such amendment by rule. d. The department shall, no later than September 30, 2024, and two years thereafter, submit to the council and the mayor a report on the minimum payment standard, any amendment to such standard, and the effect of such minimum payment standard on food delivery workers and the food delivery industry. § 20-1523 Payments to workers. a. A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service shall not charge or impose any fee on a food delivery worker for the use of any form of payment selected by such service to pay such worker for work performed. b. A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service shall pay a food delivery worker for work performed no less frequently than once a week. § 20-1524 Insulated food delivery bags. a. 1. A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service shall provide at its own expense, or ensure the availability of, an insulated food delivery bag to each food delivery worker, provided that such worker has completed at least six deliveries for such service. Such service may not require any food delivery worker to provide an insulated food delivery bag at such worker's expense. Such insulated food delivery bag must be designed for use in accordance with section 1235 of the vehicle and traffic law. 2. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the use of insulated delivery bags by food delivery workers. § 20-1525 Fire safety materials. a. The department, in consultation with the fire department, shall identify materials developed pursuant to section 15-147, regarding the fire risks posed by powered mobility devices and safety measures that mitigate such risks, for dissemination to food delivery workers. The department shall publish such materials on the city's website. b. A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service shall provide the materials identified by the department pursuant to subdivision a of this section to a food delivery worker hired, retained, or engaged by any such service. A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service shall provide such materials by email and as a link within a text message sent to a food delivery worker no later than sixty days after the department publishes such materials pursuant to subdivision a of this section. Such materials shall be provided in English, the designated citywide languages as defined in section 23-1101, and any additional languages as determined by the commissioner, provided that the department has published the materials in such additional languages.